H I G H L I G H T S
• New multiparametric approach for river
water source quality monitoring at
DWTP
• PCA
modelling
distinguished
three
factors to dominate the river quality.
• The organic and inorganic matter factors
show time-series patterns.
• Events with organic and inorganic
matter origins have been discussed.
• Microbiological and organic matter
events occur simultaneously.
G R A P H I C A L
A B S T R A C T
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 20 December 2018
Received in revised form 14 February 2019
Accepted 27 February 2019
Available online 28 February 2019
Editor: Paola Verlicchi
Most of the Mediterranean rivers are suffering the effects of industrial, urban and mining discharges, as well as a
reduction in water quantity and quality. Additionally, due to the Mediterranean climate, the natural water re-
source availability is periodically lower than the water demand in the area. Operation of drinking water plants
in these geographical areas needs advanced process control systems where real-time and in-line water quality
monitoring tools are key components. Data sets with parameters generated by monitoring sensors and from
laboratory analysis are used to reveal the main factors that characterize water quality. Chemometric tools like
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) can be used to explore and analyze correlations among different physico-
chemical and microbiological parameters with the aim to assess the river water quality at the water intake of
drinking water treatment plants (DWTPs). Strong seasonal trends in the organic and inorganic matter contents
and unusual events in the raw river water quality at the DWTP water intake are revealed. Organic and inorganic
patterns are then associated with climatological, meteorological and industrial pollution circumstances typical for
the geographical region under study. In addition, microbiological events can be detected at the water intake of
DWTP which may occur simultaneously with increasing water contents of organic matter, especially at the begin-
ning of rainfall episodes. The application of PCA on sensors data in the water intake at DWTPs offers new possi-
bilities for improved quality assurance and control procedures for DWTP management and its strategy.
© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords:
River water
Quality
Sensors
Chemometrics
DWTP
Science of the Total Environment 667 (2019) 552–562
☆Declarations of interest: none.
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: stefan.platikanov@idaea.csic.es (S. Platikanov).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.02.423
0048-9697/© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Science of the Total Environment
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/scitotenv


<!-- Page 2 -->
