1. Introduction
Water resources management is an important element of sustain-
ability in urban areas, with complex infrastructure networks. Moreover,
this is even more relevant in Mediterranean semiarid regions with
water scarcity scenarios in which water resources are affected by high
salinity and the presence of micropollutants (Köck-Schulmeyer et al.,
2011; Kuzmanovic et al., 2015; Momblanch et al., 2015). Advanced
urban water infrastructures specially drinking water plants for such sce-
narios require a signiﬁcant increase in capital and operational expenses
(Aydin et al., 2015). The need for smart infrastructure represents a sig-
niﬁcant capital investment where highly efﬁcient treatment technolo-
gies and in-line and real-time water quality monitoring tools are key
elements (Mustonen et al., 2008; Marlow et al., 2013; Behmel et al.,
2016). Efﬁcient waterworks management requires clear goals and deﬁ-
nitions, time and space scales, and quantiﬁable indicators.
Many urban areas in different regions and countries (e.g. California
and Arizona in USA, Israel, Australia, Mediterranean cost in south
Europe and north of Africa, Southern cities of South Africa) with drink-
ing water supply networks based on surface water resources, have ex-
perienced a reduction of their water quantity and quality due to
climate, environmental and anthropogenic pressures (McDonald et al.,
2011; Rockström and Karlberg, 2010; Navarro-Ortega et al., 2015). Dif-
ferent infrastructures have been proposed and implemented to improve
drinking water quality and even more important to ensure the long-
term resources availability. The general approach is following the inte-
gration of processes where the role of membrane technologies is funda-
mental (Gibert et al., 2017; Raich-Montiu et al., 2014; Vera et al., 2017;).
Among these technologies the more important are membrane-based
technologies in drinking water treatment plants (DWTPs) (e.g.
nanoﬁltration, reverse osmosis, electrodialysis reversal) to diminish
the salinity levels and to reduce micropollutants and seawater desalina-
tion technologies when surface and groundwater resources are scarce
(Ferrer et al., 2016).
One well known example of this scenario is the Sant Joan Despí
DWTP on the Llobregat River at the Barcelona (Catalonia, Spain) Metro-
politan Area (BMA). The Llobregat River is one of the major resources of
water for the Barcelona metropolitan area with 4.7 million of inhabi-
tants. It supplies around 40% of the total water demand (Devesa et al.,
2007).
Fig. 1A shows the location of the SJD DWTPs just 15 km west of Bar-
celona. The plant has N50 years of experience in producing and supply-
ing drinking water in Barcelona. It comprises traditional plant operation
schemes together with sophisticated membrane treatment technolo-
gies based on ultraﬁltration and reverse osmosis (López-Roldán et al.,
2016) converting the SJD DWTP into one of the most sophisticated
DWTPs across Europe with water production capacity of 5.5 m3/s (see
Fig. 1B).
Along the Llobregat River basin catchment area, there are three
dams located in the upper part and several small rivers contribute to
the main streamﬂow. In the upper and middle part of the river (Marcé
et al., 2012), the mineral composition of water is strongly affected by
sedimentary rocks such as limestone, marls, gypsum and halite,
resulting in very high levels of mineralization (dry residue around
900 mg/L, Fernandez-Turiel et al., 2003). The heavy industrialization
and agricultural growth along the river basin, the ﬁnancial and techno-
logical constraints, and non–enforcement/bypassing of public laws,
have led to considerable water pollution of the Llobregat river
(Ginebreda et al., 2012). Frequently, the river water quality of this
river is affected by accidental sewage discharges, industrial spills, and
pollution from agricultural and urban run-off (Aguillera et al., 2012).
Moreover, the Llobregat river water quality is strongly affected from
the potash mining industry located in the middle part of the river
basin (Ladrera et al., 2017) during raining episodes. Furthermore, the
climate changing conditions in the region (Versini et al., 2016) produce
difﬁculties in DWTP management. More speciﬁcally, scarce snow/
rainfalls along the year cause long and severe droughts, whereas a few
heavy spring/summer rainfalls lead to ﬂoods with an adverse effect on
water quality.
The main objective of this study is to demonstrate the possibilities of
using chemometrics methods like PCA for the simultaneous analysis of
multiple water quality parameters with the goal of adopting more com-
prehensive monitoring and water quality control strategies, reducing
both time and efforts expend in the monitoring process. In the near fu-
ture detection and analysis of events/patterns can be strongly facilitated
by collecting data from multiple connected sensors for water quality as-
sessment incorporating internet resources in DWTP management to-
gether with the methods proposed in this work for multivariate data
analysis tools.
