2.1. Current water quality monitoring practices at the intake
The existing practice for water quality monitoring at the intake of
SJD DWTP is based on the inspection of individual raw water quality
physicochemical parameters such as the UV absorption at 254 nm
(UV254), turbidity (TURB), total organic carbon (TOC), pH, conductivity
(COND) and others. DWTP operators based their decisions on individual
parameter values using pre-established thresholds. DWTP management
is certiﬁed according to the ISO 22000 norm, ensuring continuous com-
pliance of the ﬁnal treated water. For the quality monitoring process,
data obtained by grab sampling and from laboratory analysis and/or
from on-line/in-line sensors are used. Decision-making process is
largely univariate in nature, where statistical analysis is conducted by
monitoring one by one the different physicochemical parameters at
the water intake of DWTP. Many of these individual thresholds have
been suggested by speciﬁc legislative directives to be fulﬁlled. Because
such thresholds do not capture local climate conditions and site-
speciﬁc events, the monitoring activities are subject to severe limita-
tions. More speciﬁcally, the prevalent policy of using individual thresh-
olds falls to consider that water quality is determined by the interaction
of multiple parameters in water system. As a result, hidden and/or la-
tent information about the correlations and interrelationships among
these multiple parameters is not incorporated in the monitoring pro-
cess. For instance, an event related to ﬂooding can be described by the
combination of different parameters such as turbidity, organic load
and higher UV254nm absorbance. During rain events, the values of
these parameters will increase signiﬁcantly (Volk et al., 2002). A combi-
nation of increased values of conductivity, ammonium concentration,
spectral abnormalities and unusual pH changes on the other side
would suggest a chemical pollution event.
Water quality monitoring practices also include the microbiological
control of the raw water, which is permanent at the water intake of
DWTP. There are legislative standards for microbiological control of sev-
eral bacteria species, which require their permanent monitoring (DWD,
1998). In SJD DWTP, microbiological analyses at each step of the treat-
ment are performed once per week at minimum. At the end of the re-
quired time of proliferation (usually 1–2 days), bacterial colonies are
identiﬁed and quantiﬁed. Presence of bacteria at the entrance of
DWTP is chronic. The existing analytical procedure however does not
account for sudden spikes of the bacterial counts with an accidental
character. The knowledge about water quality parameters with positive
correlations with bacterial events would help to design strategies for fu-
ture monitoring and protection of the water intake.
Several contamination episodes were recorded at the SJD over the
last past years. They were caused primarily by industrial discharges of
dicyclopentadiene and derivatives (Ventura et al., 1997), dioxanes/
dioxolanes (Romero et al., 1998) and creosote (Ventura et al., 1998).
Boleda et al. (2007) reviewed taste and odor events detected from
1990 until 2004. These previous studies have concluded that the indus-
trial contamination has produced more contamination episodes than
553
S. Platikanov et al. / Science of the Total Environment 667 (2019) 552–562


<!-- Page 3 -->
other factors. Martin-Alonso et al. (2007) reported a contamination ep-
isode with diacetyl and butanedione. The permanent quality monitoring
at the intake of the Sant Joan Despí (SJD) drinking water treatment plant
(DWTP) over the past years has generated a signiﬁcant volume of data
about the Llobregat River raw water quality. The analysis of these data
sets can be performed using multivariate statistical methods. The infor-
mation extracted from these analysis can be used to signiﬁcantly im-
prove water plant management and decision-making strategies and
allow adoption of improved approaches for protect DWTP protection
from river water pollution events.
