2.3. Multivariate statistical analysis of water quality parameters at the in-
take of the SJD DWTP using principal component analysis
Multiple parameters, generated by on-line sensors and from labora-
tory assays generate large sets of samples, which can be simultaneously
analysed to provide a comprehensive view of natural raw river quality
patterns and unknown events and hence provide adequate tools for
the improvement of water treatment procedures in DWTPs. Datasets
are stored in two-dimensional tables or data matrices, where observa-
tions/measurements (ordered by time or by samples) are in the rows
and measured parameters/variables are in the columns of a data table
(data matrix). Thus, these two-dimensional data tables can be easily
analysed using existing multivariate statistical and chemometrics
methods.
Principal Component Analysis, PCA, (Jolliffe, 2002) is probably the
most popular method in multivariate statistical analysis of environmen-
tal data. It is based on the assumption that in the original data set there
is a small number of dominant factors with signiﬁcant inﬂuence (com-
ponents) which are the main source of variation. These factors cannot
be measured directly, because they cannot be captured with a sensor
or observed experimentally. As a result, they are usually called hidden
factors. Thus, PCA would allow the investigation of temporal (seasonal),
meteorological and pollution patterns/trends in the different recorded
data sets. PCA allows for the investigation and modelling of the complex
relationships and/or interactions existing among multiple parameters
and samples (observations) in the analysis of environmental monitor-
ing data sets. PCA results can show the hidden underlying processes in
the monitoring of water quality parameters in DWTPs.
According to the PCA model, the original experimental data matrix
D, is decomposed using a bilinear model, giving two orthogonal matri-
ces, T scores (mapping the samples on the principal components), PT
loadings (mapping the measured variables on the principal compo-
nents) and E is the matrix of residuals (unexplained variance) as in
Eq. (1).
D ¼ TPT þ E
ð1Þ
The number of principal components to be considered in the PCA
model (rows of T and columns of PT) throughout this study was selected
on the basis of the following criteria: a) the sizes of the eigenvalues as-
sociated with the principal components, and b) a meaningful environ-
mental explanation of score and loading proﬁles. In case of water
quality data, PT loadings display the physicochemical proﬁles of the
principal components and T scores give the mapping of the sample pro-
jections on them. In this water quality study, the scores will give impor-
tant information about the temporal distribution (measurements over
time, time distribution) of the samples, which l show possible hidden
trends and can be analysed by time series analysis (see below).
Unusual events at the water intake of the San Joan Despí DWTP are
investigated. An effective and useful way for the detection of these un-
usual events is the Q residuals chart, which shows the differences (or re-
siduals) between measurements and their projections on the k principal
components retained in the PCA model along time. Q residuals indicate
the degree to which a particular measurement conforms to the model.
Samples with large residuals values are not well explained by the
model and they can be considered as unusual events. When a measure-
ment is ﬂagged as an event, it is recommended to examine the so-called
Q contribution plot (Wise and Gallagher, 1996). Q contributions plot
displays one row of the residuals E matrix for the considered sample
event. Q contributions plots show how much of every variable/parame-
ter contributes to the overall Q value for the considered sample, while
retaining the sign of the contribution of the given parameter. Visualiza-
tion of parameter Q contributions can be used to identify which of them
contribute more to the given sample's sum-squared residual error
(Wise et al., 1989). Conﬁdence limits can be also calculated for further
examination. They provide threshold values of the regular/outlying con-
ditions. When the quality of the water in the intake is under control, Q
residuals should display small values within these conﬁdence limits.
Unusual (outlying) events are displayed outside these conﬁdence limits
