2.2. Data organization
Historical data for 8 physicochemical quality parameters, monitored
by on-line sensors in the water intake from the Llobregat River during
two years 2013–2014 and stored in the Laboratory Information Manage-
ment System of DWTP, were collected. The monitored parameters were
turbidity in UNF (TURB), ammonium ion in mg/L (NH4), total organic car-
bon in mg/L (TOC), UV absorbance at 254 nm abs/100 cm (UV254), con-
ductivity in μS/cm (COND), pH and river ﬂow in m3/s. Additionally,
microbiological parameters from laboratory assays were also considered.
Fig. 1. A) The Llobregat river and the location of the Sant Joan Despí drinking water treatment plant nearby Barcelona, Spain. B) SJD DWTP scheme of the water treatment processes.
554
S. Platikanov et al. / Science of the Total Environment 667 (2019) 552–562


<!-- Page 4 -->
Two aspects have been considered in the preparation of the different
data sets analysed in this work. First, the availability of parameters mea-
sured in the plant and of their scheduled monitoring programs, in
agreement with new Drinking Water Regulations, the DWTP, and the
ISO22000, which establish the need of increasing the number of moni-
toring procedures. Second, the possibility of direct alignment of all pa-
rameters according to their recording time, avoiding losing of
information during this alignment and the incorporation of missing
values.
Collected data were arranged in three different data sets called
respectively:
a) Dataset 1: Time interpolated physicochemical observations,
b) Dataset 2: Experimental physicochemical observations, and
c) Dataset
3:
Augmented
datasets
including
microbiological
parameters.
Although during year 2013 physicochemical parameters were mea-
sured daily, unfortunately they did not match in their recording time.
The resulting data table had a considerable number of systematic miss-
ing. To obtain a data table without missing values, an interpolation algo-
rithm is proposed to estimate them. Thus, the application of such as
algorithm resulted in Data set 1 with the possible inconvenience of los-
ing some information about the parameters real interactions due to the
artiﬁcial data ﬁlling step. By the mid 2014, all required physicochemical
sensors at the intake were aligned according to the time of their record-
ing, and therefore, the real interactions among parameters could be in-
vestigated directly in Data Set 2. The third data set was acquired
according to the e microbiological sampling schedule in DWTP, e.g.
every Monday at 08:00 AM. This data set allowed to ﬁnd out the corre-
lation between the microbiological results and with the corresponding
physicochemical parameters.
In Dataset 1, a linear interpolation was preliminary used to align the
parameters on an hourly basis. The ﬁnal data table included 16,333
hourly measurements for 7 parameters. This dataset has allowed the
evaluation of the temporal variations in water quality over the investi-
gated period.
In Dataset 2, only those physicochemical parameters with real exper-
imental observations were considered and used for analysis. This
dataset has observations of the 7 parameters recorded at exactly the
same time during the period from July to November 2014. In total, it in-
cludes 346 experimental observations (several measurements per a sin-
gle day), matched in time for the 7 parameters. This data set was used
for the evaluation and validation of the changes in the water quality
trends, events and relationships between parameters initially detected
from the comprehensive analysis of Dataset 1.
In Dataset 3, microbiological data were collected on a weekly basis
for 2014 (52 samples). The microbiological information of this dataset
includes bacterial counts of Pseudomonas sp., Enterococus sp., Escheria
coli sp., Total coliforms, Clostridium sp. and Aeromonas sp. This dataset
has been rearranged to match the corresponding physicochemical
data recordings. In this new dataset, the information about the physico-
chemical parameters and river ﬂow were also considered in the analy-
sis. Thus, this new augmented data matrix considered a total number
of 52 samples (one per week) and 14 parameters (6 microbiological in-
dices and 8 physicochemical parameters).
