3.1. Seasonal variability of the Llobregat river water quality at the intake
(PCA of dataset 1)
PCA was applied ﬁrst to the autoscaled Dataset 1, containing the
16,333 hourly measurements of the 7 quality parameters (after time in-
terpolation alignment). Results with 3 principal components (PCs) are
shown in Fig. 2, explaining 72% of the total experimental data variance
(PC1 35%; PC2 24% and PC3 13%).
Fig. 2. PCA of the sensors data set for 7 physicochemical parameters at the intake of SJD DWTP obtained in two years of monitoring and applied linear interpolation for time alignment
within sensor measurements . PC1-3 loading plots: A), C) and E); PC1-3 sample (hourly recordings) scores plots B), D) and F).
556
S. Platikanov et al. / Science of the Total Environment 667 (2019) 552–562


<!-- Page 6 -->
PC1 (35%) describes the variability of the organic matter as the main
factor in Dataset 1 since it is strongly dominated by the positive correla-
tion between TOC and UV254 (with the highest positive loadings on
PC1). In addition, this PC1 reveals positive correlation of NH4 and
TURB parameters (also found with positive loadings) with the organic
matter. pH had a negative loading and it was found to be inversely cor-
related with the other four above mentioned parameters (see Fig. 2A).
The organic matter demonstrates a seasonal, temporal variability of
the water quality (see Fig. 2B, PC1 scores on the right) and also sharp
ﬂuctuations occurring over the entire period of investigations. Positive
PC1 scores were observed for measurements in spring and in autumn,
whereas scores with negative sign were found in summer and winter.
Also, positive scores were found for the sharp short termed positive
ﬂuctuations on this PC1. This observation conﬁrms the expectation
that the concentrations of organic matter were above average in spring
and autumn, and during the sharp ﬂuctuations, while the concentra-
tions of organic matter were below average for summer and winter.
PC1 scores were ﬁtted to the Fourier model, described in the method
Section 2.3, with a R2 value of 0.97. The sigmoidal trend-line in the or-
ganic matter content for 2013 showed two peaks. This fact can be ex-
plained by the typical Mediterranean type hydrological regime (nivo-
pluvial) of the Llobregat River, which also has two maxima of the river
ﬂow- in spring and in autumn as shown in Fig. 3A, where the 2013
monthly accumulated precipitation is plotted. A considerable reduction
of the organic matter in the Llobregat River is observed in the middle of
summer and winter seasons in 2013. This phenomenon was weaker in
2014, largely due to anomalies related to a persistent drought observed
for the spring of 2014 as seen in Fig. 3B and affecting the Llobregat river
hydrological regime during this year. The short term ﬂuctuations ob-
served with positive scores in Fig. 2B, can be explained by the sudden
sharp increases of the organic matter content (TOC and UV254), leading
also to the increase of TURB and NH4 parameters when large ﬂows of
water arrive to the plant due to rain episodes in the river basin. The in-
verse correlation between them and pH can be explained due to the di-
lution effect produced by the high river water ﬂows during spring,
autumn and rain episodes.
PC2 scores and loadings outlined another type of temporal variabil-
ity in the water quality trend. The second most important factor to con-
sider in the evaluation of the the water quality changes is related with
the variability of the inorganic matter content. On the loadings plot of
Fig. 2C, ammonium ion and conductivity have the high positive load-
ings, whereas the rest of parameters have negative loadings. In
Fig. 2D, a temporal sigmoidal trend line is also observed (in red, the
ﬁtted Fourier model gave in this case a R2 value of 0.91), suggesting
also a time-series behaviour of this factor. Positive scores on PC2 were
observed for the measurements in winter, whereas the scores for obser-
vations in summer were observed with negative sign values. In winter
season, the river water quality was characterized with higher conduc-
tivity and higher ammonium ion concentrations in comparison to the
summer season. During winter seasons, the Llobregat river is character-
ized with low water ﬂows resulting in higher concentrations of inor-
ganic matter. On the contrary, in spring and in autumn, when water
ﬂows increases, the concentrations of inorganic matter were around
their average values. Short-term sharp ﬂuctuations were also observed
along the trend line of PC2 scores. Such ﬂuctuations in the water quality
in the intake of the water treatment plant were associated with the
events of unusual changes in the inorganic content (Fig. 2D), when
very high values of the measured conductivity and of ammonium con-
centrations were identiﬁed.
PC3 (13% of explained variance) explains the pH variability of the
river water (strong positive loadings on PC3, Fig. 2E). In this case, it is
difﬁcult to attribute a seasonal trend related to seasonal changes, al-
though there is some small temporal changes that could be ﬁtted with
the Fourier model with a R2 value of 0.90 for this period of monitoring
(red line in Fig. 2F).
On this PC 3 turbidity shows positive correlation with pH. This fact
revealed that there were fractions of suspended material at basic pH
values of the river water. On the contrary, on PC 1 (35% of variance ex-
plained) turbidity was found inversely correlated with pH. This is due to
the increased contents of organic matter and suspended solids during
the spring and autumn due to the rainfalls, and the rise of the river
water ﬂows lead to a dilution effect and decreased pH values.
