3.3. Correlating microbiological data with the physicochemical events in the
water intake (Dataset 3)
Data from the investigated seven physicochemical parameters pre-
viously analysed in Dataset 2 were augmented with the river ﬂow and
microbiological data for the same 52 days giving Dataset 3. A total num-
ber of 14 variables were considered (6 bacteriological, River ﬂow and
the 7 physicochemical parameters). All the variables were autoscaled.
The model with 3 PCs explained N80% of the total data variance and
the ﬁrst PC already accounted for N50% of the variance. This ﬁrst PC cap-
tured most of the variation for all bacteria counts and for some of the
physicochemical parameters such as river ﬂow and TURB.
Fig. 5. Three events associated with high Q residuals for the PCA model with 3
components: A) Q residuals for PCA; B) Q residual contributions for parameters of event
1; C)Q residual contributions of parameters for event 2; D) Q residual contributions of
parameters for event 3.
559
S. Platikanov et al. / Science of the Total Environment 667 (2019) 552–562


<!-- Page 9 -->
PC1 scores (in Fig. 7A) ﬁgured out different events occurring during
a particular week in the water quality at the intake. The analysis of the
loadings plot of Fig. 7B reveals that all 7 bacteria concentrations, to-
gether with the river ﬂow, TURB and UV254, have high positive loadings
on PC1 meaning strong positive correlation among them. In contrast, in-
verse correlations between bacteria concentrations and COND and pH
water parameters were observed. This result suggests that high bacteria
concentrations were correlated with lower conductivities and pH values
in water. Peak values in the concentrations of all monitored bacteria oc-
curred when the river ﬂow was high, with strong turbidity and elevated
values of UV254 absorbance. In these conditions, COND and pH values
were lower due to dilution effects–suggesting rainy episodes. Therefore,
Most probably rainfalls washed out river bioﬁlms, and produced agri-
cultural and urban runoffs into the river water, contributing to a
signiﬁcate increase of the observed microbiological events. In addition,
wastewater overﬂow from WWTPs collectors along the Llobregat river
basin is feasible during these events.
Five events with strong bacterial occurrence were observed for the
investigated period. The strongest one was detected on Monday - 47th
week/sample. There were also other less intense events during 5th,
17th, 20th and 40th week of the monitoring period. Investigation of me-
teorological conditions (website www.meteoclimatic.com) for the
Fig. 7. PC1 results of dataset containing microbiological and physicochemical data. A) PC1 scores plot; B) PC1 loadings plot.
Fig. 6. Accumulated rainfall on 02/08/2014 for 24 h in Catalonia (Spain). Source: www.meteoclimatic.com
560
S. Platikanov et al. / Science of the Total Environment 667 (2019) 552–562


<!-- Page 10 -->
corresponding dates of detected events conﬁrmed the existing correla-
tion of the events of 17th, 20th, 40th and 47th weeks with rainfalls. The
event occurring during the 5th week was not associated to particular
weather anomalies, but in this case, a high ammonium concentration
in the river water was suggesting a possible WWTP discharge of con-
taminated water.
