<!-- Page 1 -->
Chemometric analysis for river water quality assessment at the intake of
drinking water treatment plants☆
Stefan Platikanov a,⁎, David Baquero b, Susana González b, Jordi Martín-Alonso c, Miquel Paraira c,
Jose Luis Cortina b, Roma Tauler a
a Department of Environmental Chemistry, IDAEA-CSIC, Jordi Girona, 18-26, 08026 Barcelona, Spain
b CETAQUA Water Technological Center, Ctra. Esplugues, 75, 08940 Cornellà de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain
c Aigües de Barcelona (AGBAR) Laboratory, General Batet, 5-7, 08028 Barcelona, Spain
H I G H L I G H T S
• New multiparametric approach for river
water source quality monitoring at
DWTP
• PCA
modelling
distinguished
three
factors to dominate the river quality.
• The organic and inorganic matter factors
show time-series patterns.
• Events with organic and inorganic
matter origins have been discussed.
• Microbiological and organic matter
events occur simultaneously.
G R A P H I C A L
A B S T R A C T
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 20 December 2018
Received in revised form 14 February 2019
Accepted 27 February 2019
Available online 28 February 2019
Editor: Paola Verlicchi
Most of the Mediterranean rivers are suffering the effects of industrial, urban and mining discharges, as well as a
reduction in water quantity and quality. Additionally, due to the Mediterranean climate, the natural water re-
source availability is periodically lower than the water demand in the area. Operation of drinking water plants
in these geographical areas needs advanced process control systems where real-time and in-line water quality
monitoring tools are key components. Data sets with parameters generated by monitoring sensors and from
laboratory analysis are used to reveal the main factors that characterize water quality. Chemometric tools like
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) can be used to explore and analyze correlations among different physico-
chemical and microbiological parameters with the aim to assess the river water quality at the water intake of
drinking water treatment plants (DWTPs). Strong seasonal trends in the organic and inorganic matter contents
and unusual events in the raw river water quality at the DWTP water intake are revealed. Organic and inorganic
patterns are then associated with climatological, meteorological and industrial pollution circumstances typical for
the geographical region under study. In addition, microbiological events can be detected at the water intake of
DWTP which may occur simultaneously with increasing water contents of organic matter, especially at the begin-
ning of rainfall episodes. The application of PCA on sensors data in the water intake at DWTPs offers new possi-
bilities for improved quality assurance and control procedures for DWTP management and its strategy.
© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords:
River water
Quality
Sensors
Chemometrics
DWTP
Science of the Total Environment 667 (2019) 552–562
☆Declarations of interest: none.
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: stefan.platikanov@idaea.csic.es (S. Platikanov).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.02.423
0048-9697/© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Science of the Total Environment
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/scitotenv


<!-- Page 2 -->
1. Introduction
Water resources management is an important element of sustain-
ability in urban areas, with complex infrastructure networks. Moreover,
this is even more relevant in Mediterranean semiarid regions with
water scarcity scenarios in which water resources are affected by high
salinity and the presence of micropollutants (Köck-Schulmeyer et al.,
2011; Kuzmanovic et al., 2015; Momblanch et al., 2015). Advanced
urban water infrastructures specially drinking water plants for such sce-
narios require a signiﬁcant increase in capital and operational expenses
(Aydin et al., 2015). The need for smart infrastructure represents a sig-
niﬁcant capital investment where highly efﬁcient treatment technolo-
gies and in-line and real-time water quality monitoring tools are key
elements (Mustonen et al., 2008; Marlow et al., 2013; Behmel et al.,
2016). Efﬁcient waterworks management requires clear goals and deﬁ-
nitions, time and space scales, and quantiﬁable indicators.
Many urban areas in different regions and countries (e.g. California
and Arizona in USA, Israel, Australia, Mediterranean cost in south
Europe and north of Africa, Southern cities of South Africa) with drink-
ing water supply networks based on surface water resources, have ex-
perienced a reduction of their water quantity and quality due to
climate, environmental and anthropogenic pressures (McDonald et al.,
2011; Rockström and Karlberg, 2010; Navarro-Ortega et al., 2015). Dif-
ferent infrastructures have been proposed and implemented to improve
drinking water quality and even more important to ensure the long-
term resources availability. The general approach is following the inte-
gration of processes where the role of membrane technologies is funda-
mental (Gibert et al., 2017; Raich-Montiu et al., 2014; Vera et al., 2017;).
Among these technologies the more important are membrane-based
technologies in drinking water treatment plants (DWTPs) (e.g.
nanoﬁltration, reverse osmosis, electrodialysis reversal) to diminish
the salinity levels and to reduce micropollutants and seawater desalina-
tion technologies when surface and groundwater resources are scarce
(Ferrer et al., 2016).
One well known example of this scenario is the Sant Joan Despí
DWTP on the Llobregat River at the Barcelona (Catalonia, Spain) Metro-
politan Area (BMA). The Llobregat River is one of the major resources of
water for the Barcelona metropolitan area with 4.7 million of inhabi-
tants. It supplies around 40% of the total water demand (Devesa et al.,
2007).
Fig. 1A shows the location of the SJD DWTPs just 15 km west of Bar-
celona. The plant has N50 years of experience in producing and supply-
ing drinking water in Barcelona. It comprises traditional plant operation
schemes together with sophisticated membrane treatment technolo-
gies based on ultraﬁltration and reverse osmosis (López-Roldán et al.,
2016) converting the SJD DWTP into one of the most sophisticated
DWTPs across Europe with water production capacity of 5.5 m3/s (see
Fig. 1B).
Along the Llobregat River basin catchment area, there are three
dams located in the upper part and several small rivers contribute to
the main streamﬂow. In the upper and middle part of the river (Marcé
et al., 2012), the mineral composition of water is strongly affected by
sedimentary rocks such as limestone, marls, gypsum and halite,
resulting in very high levels of mineralization (dry residue around
900 mg/L, Fernandez-Turiel et al., 2003). The heavy industrialization
and agricultural growth along the river basin, the ﬁnancial and techno-
logical constraints, and non–enforcement/bypassing of public laws,
have led to considerable water pollution of the Llobregat river
(Ginebreda et al., 2012). Frequently, the river water quality of this
river is affected by accidental sewage discharges, industrial spills, and
pollution from agricultural and urban run-off (Aguillera et al., 2012).
Moreover, the Llobregat river water quality is strongly affected from
the potash mining industry located in the middle part of the river
basin (Ladrera et al., 2017) during raining episodes. Furthermore, the
climate changing conditions in the region (Versini et al., 2016) produce
difﬁculties in DWTP management. More speciﬁcally, scarce snow/
rainfalls along the year cause long and severe droughts, whereas a few
heavy spring/summer rainfalls lead to ﬂoods with an adverse effect on
water quality.
The main objective of this study is to demonstrate the possibilities of
using chemometrics methods like PCA for the simultaneous analysis of
multiple water quality parameters with the goal of adopting more com-
prehensive monitoring and water quality control strategies, reducing
both time and efforts expend in the monitoring process. In the near fu-
ture detection and analysis of events/patterns can be strongly facilitated
by collecting data from multiple connected sensors for water quality as-
sessment incorporating internet resources in DWTP management to-
gether with the methods proposed in this work for multivariate data
analysis tools.
2. Material and methods
2.1. Current water quality monitoring practices at the intake
The existing practice for water quality monitoring at the intake of
SJD DWTP is based on the inspection of individual raw water quality
physicochemical parameters such as the UV absorption at 254 nm
(UV254), turbidity (TURB), total organic carbon (TOC), pH, conductivity
(COND) and others. DWTP operators based their decisions on individual
parameter values using pre-established thresholds. DWTP management
is certiﬁed according to the ISO 22000 norm, ensuring continuous com-
pliance of the ﬁnal treated water. For the quality monitoring process,
data obtained by grab sampling and from laboratory analysis and/or
from on-line/in-line sensors are used. Decision-making process is
largely univariate in nature, where statistical analysis is conducted by
monitoring one by one the different physicochemical parameters at
the water intake of DWTP. Many of these individual thresholds have
been suggested by speciﬁc legislative directives to be fulﬁlled. Because
such thresholds do not capture local climate conditions and site-
speciﬁc events, the monitoring activities are subject to severe limita-
tions. More speciﬁcally, the prevalent policy of using individual thresh-
olds falls to consider that water quality is determined by the interaction
of multiple parameters in water system. As a result, hidden and/or la-
tent information about the correlations and interrelationships among
these multiple parameters is not incorporated in the monitoring pro-
cess. For instance, an event related to ﬂooding can be described by the
combination of different parameters such as turbidity, organic load
and higher UV254nm absorbance. During rain events, the values of
these parameters will increase signiﬁcantly (Volk et al., 2002). A combi-
nation of increased values of conductivity, ammonium concentration,
spectral abnormalities and unusual pH changes on the other side
would suggest a chemical pollution event.
Water quality monitoring practices also include the microbiological
control of the raw water, which is permanent at the water intake of
DWTP. There are legislative standards for microbiological control of sev-
eral bacteria species, which require their permanent monitoring (DWD,
1998). In SJD DWTP, microbiological analyses at each step of the treat-
ment are performed once per week at minimum. At the end of the re-
quired time of proliferation (usually 1–2 days), bacterial colonies are
identiﬁed and quantiﬁed. Presence of bacteria at the entrance of
DWTP is chronic. The existing analytical procedure however does not
account for sudden spikes of the bacterial counts with an accidental
character. The knowledge about water quality parameters with positive
correlations with bacterial events would help to design strategies for fu-
ture monitoring and protection of the water intake.
Several contamination episodes were recorded at the SJD over the
last past years. They were caused primarily by industrial discharges of
dicyclopentadiene and derivatives (Ventura et al., 1997), dioxanes/
dioxolanes (Romero et al., 1998) and creosote (Ventura et al., 1998).
Boleda et al. (2007) reviewed taste and odor events detected from
1990 until 2004. These previous studies have concluded that the indus-
trial contamination has produced more contamination episodes than
553
S. Platikanov et al. / Science of the Total Environment 667 (2019) 552–562


<!-- Page 3 -->
other factors. Martin-Alonso et al. (2007) reported a contamination ep-
isode with diacetyl and butanedione. The permanent quality monitoring
at the intake of the Sant Joan Despí (SJD) drinking water treatment plant
(DWTP) over the past years has generated a signiﬁcant volume of data
about the Llobregat River raw water quality. The analysis of these data
sets can be performed using multivariate statistical methods. The infor-
mation extracted from these analysis can be used to signiﬁcantly im-
prove water plant management and decision-making strategies and
allow adoption of improved approaches for protect DWTP protection
from river water pollution events.
2.2. Data organization
Historical data for 8 physicochemical quality parameters, monitored
by on-line sensors in the water intake from the Llobregat River during
two years 2013–2014 and stored in the Laboratory Information Manage-
ment System of DWTP, were collected. The monitored parameters were
turbidity in UNF (TURB), ammonium ion in mg/L (NH4), total organic car-
bon in mg/L (TOC), UV absorbance at 254 nm abs/100 cm (UV254), con-
ductivity in μS/cm (COND), pH and river ﬂow in m3/s. Additionally,
microbiological parameters from laboratory assays were also considered.
Fig. 1. A) The Llobregat river and the location of the Sant Joan Despí drinking water treatment plant nearby Barcelona, Spain. B) SJD DWTP scheme of the water treatment processes.
554
S. Platikanov et al. / Science of the Total Environment 667 (2019) 552–562


<!-- Page 4 -->
Two aspects have been considered in the preparation of the different
data sets analysed in this work. First, the availability of parameters mea-
sured in the plant and of their scheduled monitoring programs, in
agreement with new Drinking Water Regulations, the DWTP, and the
ISO22000, which establish the need of increasing the number of moni-
toring procedures. Second, the possibility of direct alignment of all pa-
rameters according to their recording time, avoiding losing of
information during this alignment and the incorporation of missing
values.
Collected data were arranged in three different data sets called
respectively:
a) Dataset 1: Time interpolated physicochemical observations,
b) Dataset 2: Experimental physicochemical observations, and
c) Dataset
3:
Augmented
datasets
including
microbiological
parameters.
Although during year 2013 physicochemical parameters were mea-
sured daily, unfortunately they did not match in their recording time.
The resulting data table had a considerable number of systematic miss-
ing. To obtain a data table without missing values, an interpolation algo-
rithm is proposed to estimate them. Thus, the application of such as
algorithm resulted in Data set 1 with the possible inconvenience of los-
ing some information about the parameters real interactions due to the
artiﬁcial data ﬁlling step. By the mid 2014, all required physicochemical
sensors at the intake were aligned according to the time of their record-
ing, and therefore, the real interactions among parameters could be in-
vestigated directly in Data Set 2. The third data set was acquired
according to the e microbiological sampling schedule in DWTP, e.g.
every Monday at 08:00 AM. This data set allowed to ﬁnd out the corre-
lation between the microbiological results and with the corresponding
physicochemical parameters.
In Dataset 1, a linear interpolation was preliminary used to align the
parameters on an hourly basis. The ﬁnal data table included 16,333
hourly measurements for 7 parameters. This dataset has allowed the
evaluation of the temporal variations in water quality over the investi-
gated period.
In Dataset 2, only those physicochemical parameters with real exper-
imental observations were considered and used for analysis. This
dataset has observations of the 7 parameters recorded at exactly the
same time during the period from July to November 2014. In total, it in-
cludes 346 experimental observations (several measurements per a sin-
gle day), matched in time for the 7 parameters. This data set was used
for the evaluation and validation of the changes in the water quality
trends, events and relationships between parameters initially detected
from the comprehensive analysis of Dataset 1.
In Dataset 3, microbiological data were collected on a weekly basis
for 2014 (52 samples). The microbiological information of this dataset
includes bacterial counts of Pseudomonas sp., Enterococus sp., Escheria
coli sp., Total coliforms, Clostridium sp. and Aeromonas sp. This dataset
has been rearranged to match the corresponding physicochemical
data recordings. In this new dataset, the information about the physico-
chemical parameters and river ﬂow were also considered in the analy-
sis. Thus, this new augmented data matrix considered a total number
of 52 samples (one per week) and 14 parameters (6 microbiological in-
dices and 8 physicochemical parameters).
2.3. Multivariate statistical analysis of water quality parameters at the in-
take of the SJD DWTP using principal component analysis
Multiple parameters, generated by on-line sensors and from labora-
tory assays generate large sets of samples, which can be simultaneously
analysed to provide a comprehensive view of natural raw river quality
patterns and unknown events and hence provide adequate tools for
the improvement of water treatment procedures in DWTPs. Datasets
are stored in two-dimensional tables or data matrices, where observa-
tions/measurements (ordered by time or by samples) are in the rows
and measured parameters/variables are in the columns of a data table
(data matrix). Thus, these two-dimensional data tables can be easily
analysed using existing multivariate statistical and chemometrics
methods.
Principal Component Analysis, PCA, (Jolliffe, 2002) is probably the
most popular method in multivariate statistical analysis of environmen-
tal data. It is based on the assumption that in the original data set there
is a small number of dominant factors with signiﬁcant inﬂuence (com-
ponents) which are the main source of variation. These factors cannot
be measured directly, because they cannot be captured with a sensor
or observed experimentally. As a result, they are usually called hidden
factors. Thus, PCA would allow the investigation of temporal (seasonal),
meteorological and pollution patterns/trends in the different recorded
data sets. PCA allows for the investigation and modelling of the complex
relationships and/or interactions existing among multiple parameters
and samples (observations) in the analysis of environmental monitor-
ing data sets. PCA results can show the hidden underlying processes in
the monitoring of water quality parameters in DWTPs.
According to the PCA model, the original experimental data matrix
D, is decomposed using a bilinear model, giving two orthogonal matri-
ces, T scores (mapping the samples on the principal components), PT
loadings (mapping the measured variables on the principal compo-
nents) and E is the matrix of residuals (unexplained variance) as in
Eq. (1).
D ¼ TPT þ E
ð1Þ
The number of principal components to be considered in the PCA
model (rows of T and columns of PT) throughout this study was selected
on the basis of the following criteria: a) the sizes of the eigenvalues as-
sociated with the principal components, and b) a meaningful environ-
mental explanation of score and loading proﬁles. In case of water
quality data, PT loadings display the physicochemical proﬁles of the
principal components and T scores give the mapping of the sample pro-
jections on them. In this water quality study, the scores will give impor-
tant information about the temporal distribution (measurements over
time, time distribution) of the samples, which l show possible hidden
trends and can be analysed by time series analysis (see below).
Unusual events at the water intake of the San Joan Despí DWTP are
investigated. An effective and useful way for the detection of these un-
usual events is the Q residuals chart, which shows the differences (or re-
siduals) between measurements and their projections on the k principal
components retained in the PCA model along time. Q residuals indicate
the degree to which a particular measurement conforms to the model.
Samples with large residuals values are not well explained by the
model and they can be considered as unusual events. When a measure-
ment is ﬂagged as an event, it is recommended to examine the so-called
Q contribution plot (Wise and Gallagher, 1996). Q contributions plot
displays one row of the residuals E matrix for the considered sample
event. Q contributions plots show how much of every variable/parame-
ter contributes to the overall Q value for the considered sample, while
retaining the sign of the contribution of the given parameter. Visualiza-
tion of parameter Q contributions can be used to identify which of them
contribute more to the given sample's sum-squared residual error
(Wise et al., 1989). Conﬁdence limits can be also calculated for further
examination. They provide threshold values of the regular/outlying con-
ditions. When the quality of the water in the intake is under control, Q
residuals should display small values within these conﬁdence limits.
Unusual (outlying) events are displayed outside these conﬁdence limits
2.4. Curve ﬁtting of times series
PCA of Dataset 1 showed a periodic form, representing the score
values at different time poins ti (on hourly basis), which is assumed to
555
S. Platikanov et al. / Science of the Total Environment 667 (2019) 552–562


<!-- Page 5 -->
be a mixture of the useful temporal signal y (the general trend in the
water quality over the entire period of monitoring for each of the prin-
cipal components) and noise, which would be the water quality non-
time dependent periodic events or extreme values (Deng and Wang,
2017). The useful signal y can be represented as a continuous periodic
function deﬁned over a certain time interval and the water quality
values not explained by this periodic function are considered to be
noise. This periodic nature of the scores (as periodic signal g(x)) can
be modelled by a Fourier series approximation (Mueller-Warrant
et al., 2012) according to the equation:
g x
ð Þ ¼ a0 þ
X
n
i¼1
ai∙cos i∙w∙x
ð
Þ þ bi∙sin i∙w∙x
ð
Þ
ð
Þ
ð2Þ
where a0 models a constant (intercept) term in the data and is associ-
ated with the i = 0 cosine term, w is the fundamental frequency of
the signal, n is the number of terms (harmonics) in the series, and 1 ≤
n ≤8.
The best data ﬁtting were obtained by visual inspection and consid-
ering the highest determination coefﬁcient as measure of how well the
above mentioned equation performed as a predictor.
3. Results and discussion
The objective of this study is the modelling of the water quality pa-
rameters at the intake of the SJD DWTP (Dataset1, Dataset2 and
Dataset3) using Principal Component Analysis (PCA).
3.1. Seasonal variability of the Llobregat river water quality at the intake
(PCA of dataset 1)
PCA was applied ﬁrst to the autoscaled Dataset 1, containing the
16,333 hourly measurements of the 7 quality parameters (after time in-
terpolation alignment). Results with 3 principal components (PCs) are
shown in Fig. 2, explaining 72% of the total experimental data variance
(PC1 35%; PC2 24% and PC3 13%).
Fig. 2. PCA of the sensors data set for 7 physicochemical parameters at the intake of SJD DWTP obtained in two years of monitoring and applied linear interpolation for time alignment
within sensor measurements . PC1-3 loading plots: A), C) and E); PC1-3 sample (hourly recordings) scores plots B), D) and F).
556
S. Platikanov et al. / Science of the Total Environment 667 (2019) 552–562


<!-- Page 6 -->
PC1 (35%) describes the variability of the organic matter as the main
factor in Dataset 1 since it is strongly dominated by the positive correla-
tion between TOC and UV254 (with the highest positive loadings on
PC1). In addition, this PC1 reveals positive correlation of NH4 and
TURB parameters (also found with positive loadings) with the organic
matter. pH had a negative loading and it was found to be inversely cor-
related with the other four above mentioned parameters (see Fig. 2A).
The organic matter demonstrates a seasonal, temporal variability of
the water quality (see Fig. 2B, PC1 scores on the right) and also sharp
ﬂuctuations occurring over the entire period of investigations. Positive
PC1 scores were observed for measurements in spring and in autumn,
whereas scores with negative sign were found in summer and winter.
Also, positive scores were found for the sharp short termed positive
ﬂuctuations on this PC1. This observation conﬁrms the expectation
that the concentrations of organic matter were above average in spring
and autumn, and during the sharp ﬂuctuations, while the concentra-
tions of organic matter were below average for summer and winter.
PC1 scores were ﬁtted to the Fourier model, described in the method
Section 2.3, with a R2 value of 0.97. The sigmoidal trend-line in the or-
ganic matter content for 2013 showed two peaks. This fact can be ex-
plained by the typical Mediterranean type hydrological regime (nivo-
pluvial) of the Llobregat River, which also has two maxima of the river
ﬂow- in spring and in autumn as shown in Fig. 3A, where the 2013
monthly accumulated precipitation is plotted. A considerable reduction
of the organic matter in the Llobregat River is observed in the middle of
summer and winter seasons in 2013. This phenomenon was weaker in
2014, largely due to anomalies related to a persistent drought observed
for the spring of 2014 as seen in Fig. 3B and affecting the Llobregat river
hydrological regime during this year. The short term ﬂuctuations ob-
served with positive scores in Fig. 2B, can be explained by the sudden
sharp increases of the organic matter content (TOC and UV254), leading
also to the increase of TURB and NH4 parameters when large ﬂows of
water arrive to the plant due to rain episodes in the river basin. The in-
verse correlation between them and pH can be explained due to the di-
lution effect produced by the high river water ﬂows during spring,
autumn and rain episodes.
PC2 scores and loadings outlined another type of temporal variabil-
ity in the water quality trend. The second most important factor to con-
sider in the evaluation of the the water quality changes is related with
the variability of the inorganic matter content. On the loadings plot of
Fig. 2C, ammonium ion and conductivity have the high positive load-
ings, whereas the rest of parameters have negative loadings. In
Fig. 2D, a temporal sigmoidal trend line is also observed (in red, the
ﬁtted Fourier model gave in this case a R2 value of 0.91), suggesting
also a time-series behaviour of this factor. Positive scores on PC2 were
observed for the measurements in winter, whereas the scores for obser-
vations in summer were observed with negative sign values. In winter
season, the river water quality was characterized with higher conduc-
tivity and higher ammonium ion concentrations in comparison to the
summer season. During winter seasons, the Llobregat river is character-
ized with low water ﬂows resulting in higher concentrations of inor-
ganic matter. On the contrary, in spring and in autumn, when water
ﬂows increases, the concentrations of inorganic matter were around
their average values. Short-term sharp ﬂuctuations were also observed
along the trend line of PC2 scores. Such ﬂuctuations in the water quality
in the intake of the water treatment plant were associated with the
events of unusual changes in the inorganic content (Fig. 2D), when
very high values of the measured conductivity and of ammonium con-
centrations were identiﬁed.
PC3 (13% of explained variance) explains the pH variability of the
river water (strong positive loadings on PC3, Fig. 2E). In this case, it is
difﬁcult to attribute a seasonal trend related to seasonal changes, al-
though there is some small temporal changes that could be ﬁtted with
the Fourier model with a R2 value of 0.90 for this period of monitoring
(red line in Fig. 2F).
On this PC 3 turbidity shows positive correlation with pH. This fact
revealed that there were fractions of suspended material at basic pH
values of the river water. On the contrary, on PC 1 (35% of variance ex-
plained) turbidity was found inversely correlated with pH. This is due to
the increased contents of organic matter and suspended solids during
the spring and autumn due to the rainfalls, and the rise of the river
water ﬂows lead to a dilution effect and decreased pH values.
3.2. Event detection in the intake of the Llobregat River (PCA of dataset 2)
The focus of this particular study is on the short-term, strong ﬂuctu-
ations, which can be assigned to possible pollution events, detected in
the PCA scores plots.
Dataset 2 with the 346 real experimental observations for the seven
parameters (which matched their time recordings) was analysed with
PCA to further investigate and validate the nature of the previously ob-
served events (in Dataset 1) related with the organic matter, inorganic
matter and pH component sources explained in the previous section.
These 346 observations spanned six months of monitoring, between
July and November 2014. PCA applied to the autoscaled data suggested
a model with three principal components, explaining as much as 81% of
the total data variance. The relative percentage variance contributions
of these components were: PC1 40% N PC2 25% N PC3 16%.
Analysis of PC1-PC3 loading plots (see Fig. 4A, C and E) conﬁrmed
that the same three factors previously explained in the analysis of
Fig. 3. Accumulated monthly precipitations registered for 2013 (A) and for 2014 (B) at the automatic meteorological station of El Prat de Llobregat, 5 km from the Sant Joan Despí DWTP.
557
S. Platikanov et al. / Science of the Total Environment 667 (2019) 552–562


<!-- Page 7 -->
Dataset1 are present in Dataset 2. PC1 describes the variance ion the or-
ganic matter content and detects the more signiﬁcant events related
with sudden change in its concentration. PC2 describes the variance in
the inorganic matter and also the events related with its sudden change.
PC3 is related with the river water pH changes. A deeper discussion of
these three factors is given in Section 3.1. A similar behaviour is con-
ﬁrmed for the two data sets (Dataset 1 with interpolated data and
Data set 2 with real data over the same time period). Whereas Dataset
1 was especially useful for the exploration of the general water quality
trends Dataset 2 was useful for the investigation and comparison of
the short term events with signiﬁcant impact on the water quality.
The following discussion is focused on three consecutive events ob-
served on the scores plots of Fig. 4 and labelled with numbers 1, 2 and 3.
The selected three events appeared at the same time on each of the
three PCA scores plots suggesting that these three principal components
contributed independently to each of the mentioned events. These
events also show very high Q residuals (see Fig. 5A) suggesting extreme
values. Further analysis of the Q parameter contributions plots (Fig. 5B,
C and D) allowed to correlate these three events to a particular natural
(meteorological) or industrial (spills) phenomena using meteorological
information from weather data bases website meteoclimatic.com.
Weather information from numerous meteorological stations around
Fig. 4. PCA results of dataset containing 346 observations corresponding in their time of measurement for the seven parameters. PC1-3 loading plots: A), C) and E) respectively, and PC1-3
sample scores plots: B), D) and F) respectively; Three events have been pointed out with numbers on the scores plots.
558
S. Platikanov et al. / Science of the Total Environment 667 (2019) 552–562


<!-- Page 8 -->
Catalonia is provided systematically on this website. Data from stations
spread over the whole region are stored chronologically and are publi-
cally available. Thus, it is possible to examine for correlations between
our event detection with the local weather information from this
website.
Event 1 occurred at the river water intake on 03/08/2014 at 06:00 h.
The sensor readings at this hour recorded TOC 7.1 mg/L; NH4 1.91 mg/L;
TURB 567 UNF; UV254 15.8 abs/100; COND 784uS/cm; TEMP 22.9C and
pH 7.6. For this Event 1, the PCA model reported unusual sample Q-
residuals with extreme values (unexplained variance) for turbidity as
seen in Fig. 5B. On 01/08 and 02/082014, the information collected at
the weather webpage identiﬁed several rainfall episodes occurred in
24 h with recordings up to 30 mm of rainfall (see Fig. 6). Thus, this
event 1 was is an example of the effect of a sudden increase of the
washed out natural organic matter into the river ﬂow. Simultaneously,
large volumes of rain water leaded to strong dilution effects, also for
the minerals, resulting in a signiﬁcant reduction of COND and pH pa-
rameters respectively (found with negative loadings on PC1). The rest
of the event peaks with strong positive scores on PC1 were also associ-
ated to rainfall events during the six month period of investigation.
Events with high organic matter associated to industrial discharges on
PC1 were not detected.
Event 2 deﬁned the beginning of a new episode of heavy rain with a
sharp rise in the concentration of organic matter detected on PC1. This
organic matter event was gradually diminishing after some days on
this plot giving the beginning of the next event 3, observed as strong
event on PC2 and PC3 plots and explained further in the next section.
Event 2 occurred at the DWTP intake on 22/08/2014 at local time
22:00 h. The sensor readings recorded were TOC 6 mg/L; NH4
1.91 mg/L; TURB 180 UNF; UV254 13.9 abs/100 cm; COND 1045 uS/cm;
TEMP 23.2C; pH 7.8. The Q parameter contributions of the PCA model
revealed unusually high values for NH4 and in a less extent for pH and
water temperature (Fig. 5C). This rainy episode event started with a
sharp rise on NH4 suggesting a possible runoff from the wastewater
treatment plants located nearby. Event 2 on 22/08/2014 ﬁnished in
the beginning of event 3.
The peak of the event 3, occurred at 03:00 h on 01/09/2014 with sen-
sor recordings: TOC 2.6 mg/L; NH4 0.24 mg/L; TURB 153.3 UNF; UV254
11.2 abs/100 cm; COND 3413 uS/cm; TEMP 24.8C; pH 8.4. This event
shows unusual Q parameter contribution (Fig. 5D) only for the COND
parameter. In contrast, the rest of parameters were within their regular
levels. This event was produced by the unusual increase of concentra-
tions of dissolved minerals in water. Conductivity value was recorded
above 3400 μS/cm and, as a result, the DWTP had to close its activity
of water intake. Valuable information about weather conditions during
event 3, was retrieved from the meta-analysis of the meteorological da-
tabase. During 30/08/2014 and 31/08/2014, multiple local heavy rain-
falls (up to 25 mm of accumulated rainfall in short time) were
recorded by the meteorological stations located in radius of 30 km
near the potash mining facilities nearby the river basin. It is plausible
therefore to suggest that these heavy rainfalls also affected the indus-
trial area and produced signiﬁcant mineral spills which were detected
at the DWTP intake as an unusual event.
3.3. Correlating microbiological data with the physicochemical events in the
water intake (Dataset 3)
Data from the investigated seven physicochemical parameters pre-
viously analysed in Dataset 2 were augmented with the river ﬂow and
microbiological data for the same 52 days giving Dataset 3. A total num-
ber of 14 variables were considered (6 bacteriological, River ﬂow and
the 7 physicochemical parameters). All the variables were autoscaled.
The model with 3 PCs explained N80% of the total data variance and
the ﬁrst PC already accounted for N50% of the variance. This ﬁrst PC cap-
tured most of the variation for all bacteria counts and for some of the
physicochemical parameters such as river ﬂow and TURB.
Fig. 5. Three events associated with high Q residuals for the PCA model with 3
components: A) Q residuals for PCA; B) Q residual contributions for parameters of event
1; C)Q residual contributions of parameters for event 2; D) Q residual contributions of
parameters for event 3.
559
S. Platikanov et al. / Science of the Total Environment 667 (2019) 552–562


<!-- Page 9 -->
PC1 scores (in Fig. 7A) ﬁgured out different events occurring during
a particular week in the water quality at the intake. The analysis of the
loadings plot of Fig. 7B reveals that all 7 bacteria concentrations, to-
gether with the river ﬂow, TURB and UV254, have high positive loadings
on PC1 meaning strong positive correlation among them. In contrast, in-
verse correlations between bacteria concentrations and COND and pH
water parameters were observed. This result suggests that high bacteria
concentrations were correlated with lower conductivities and pH values
in water. Peak values in the concentrations of all monitored bacteria oc-
curred when the river ﬂow was high, with strong turbidity and elevated
values of UV254 absorbance. In these conditions, COND and pH values
were lower due to dilution effects–suggesting rainy episodes. Therefore,
Most probably rainfalls washed out river bioﬁlms, and produced agri-
cultural and urban runoffs into the river water, contributing to a
signiﬁcate increase of the observed microbiological events. In addition,
wastewater overﬂow from WWTPs collectors along the Llobregat river
basin is feasible during these events.
Five events with strong bacterial occurrence were observed for the
investigated period. The strongest one was detected on Monday - 47th
week/sample. There were also other less intense events during 5th,
17th, 20th and 40th week of the monitoring period. Investigation of me-
teorological conditions (website www.meteoclimatic.com) for the
Fig. 7. PC1 results of dataset containing microbiological and physicochemical data. A) PC1 scores plot; B) PC1 loadings plot.
Fig. 6. Accumulated rainfall on 02/08/2014 for 24 h in Catalonia (Spain). Source: www.meteoclimatic.com
560
S. Platikanov et al. / Science of the Total Environment 667 (2019) 552–562


<!-- Page 10 -->
corresponding dates of detected events conﬁrmed the existing correla-
tion of the events of 17th, 20th, 40th and 47th weeks with rainfalls. The
event occurring during the 5th week was not associated to particular
weather anomalies, but in this case, a high ammonium concentration
in the river water was suggesting a possible WWTP discharge of con-
taminated water.
3.4. Practical recommendations
Some practical recommendations can be considered. The concept of
multivariate statistical process control (MSPC) with PCA has been
shown to be a powerful approach (Ferrer, 2007) to monitor the contin-
uous ﬂow of information acquired by the physicochemical sensors in
real time for the detection of undesired events, quality assurance, pro-
cess optimization and process control. We propose to use PCA for real
time control of the water intake processes in SJD DWTP. A new quality
threshold can be calculated from the Q residuals of PCA model (Kourti
and MacGregor, 1996). This new threshold will allow a better monitor-
ing of the river water quality than the methodology used at present
based on the monitoring of separated thresholds for all individual pa-
rameters implemented in the DWTP. This new threshold will take into
account the observed correlations among the different physicochemical
parameters. Thus, DWTP decision making will be focused not only in
one parameter, but in all of them included in the PCA model, leading
to a safer and faster response in case of undesired event detection.
The observed seasonal variability in the water quality of the
Llobregat river can serve as an illustrative example for the design and
planning of the proper adjustments of the operational procedures of
the DWTP, as for example those related with the predominance of or-
ganic matter content in spring and autumn seasons, or those related
with the higher inorganic content in summer.
4. Conclusions
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of river quality monitoring data
is shown to be an efﬁcient chemometric tool to explore the complex re-
lationships occurring between physicochemical and microbiological
river water quality parameters, either monitored with sensors or ob-
tained by detailed analysis in the laboratories of DWTPs. Organic matter
events were characterized as a combination of three parameters with
increased values: TOC, UV254 and turbidity, whereas the events with in-
organic character showed typical increases of ammonia, conductivity
and pH. Pollution events were also correlated with recorded meteoro-
logical data. Organic and inorganic matter contents are the main factors
that dominate the changes in the river water quality and they are
mainly associated with climatic and meteorological circumstances. For
example, organic matter contribution usually shows seasonal dynamics
due to the nivo-pluvial hydrological regime of the Llobregat river. Its
contribution is higher at the beginning of episodes of heavy rains. In
contrast, the inorganic matter content shows an annual cycling trend
with maximum values in winter, whereas other punctual events in
the water intake with high inorganic matter content can occur also at
the beginning of rainy episodes (as in the rise of NH4 concentrations),
or at the end of these events with a considerable increase of the conduc-
tivity. All these results suggest that multivariate statistical process con-
trol strategy using PCA can be used as a new strategy for the
improvement of DWTP management and of the existing monitoring
processes. The application of the proposed monitoring strategy of mea-
suring and analysing simultaneously different parameters is of great
practical help in the study and understanding of the effects of larger
time scale climatic anomalies such as droughts. It can also be used for
the monitoring and control of irregular events, at short time scale,
such as those occurring from ﬂush rains and industrial spills. This
would allow faster operational responses to different type of pollution
events and allow a better protection of water plant installations. Opera-
tional management efforts should be extended to monitoring of
temporal (seasonal) water quality variability and better control of the
periodic pollution events from organic and inorganic sources. An im-
proved control of these two sources would result in an easier control
of microbiological events, as they appear especially during the begin-
ning of rainy episodes. The combination of all investigated parameters
can be used as speciﬁc ﬁngerprints for the detection of river water pol-
lution events.
Acknowledgments
SP and RT acknowledge the Ministerio de Economía y Competividad,
Spain for the grant CTQ2015-66254-C2-1-P.
This work has been ﬁnancially supported by R+i Alliance, an inter-
nal funding programme of Suez Group.
References
Aguillera, R., Sabater, S., Marcé, R., 2012. In-stream nutrient ﬂux and retention in relation
to land use in the Llobregat River Basin. In S. Sabater et al. (Eds.), The Llobregat: The
Story of a Polluted Mediterranean River. Hdb. Env. Chem., 21, 263–295. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin.
Aydin, N., Zeckzer, D., Hagen, H., Schmitt, T., 2015. A decision support system for the tech-
nical sustainability assessment of water distribution systems. Environ. Model. Softw.
67, 31–42.
Behmel, S., Damour, M., Ludwig, R., Rodriguez, M.J., 2016. Water quality monitoring strat-
egies – a review and future perspectives. Sci. Total Environ. 571, 1312–1329.
Boleda, M., Diaz, A., Marti, I., Martin-Alonso, J., Matia, L., Romero, J., Ventura, F., 2007. A re-
view of taste and odour events in Barcelona's drinking wáter área (1990–2004).
Water Sci. Technol. 55, 217–221.
Deng, W., Wang, G., 2017. A novel water quality data analysis framework based on time-
series data mining. J. Environ. Manag. 196, 365–375.
Devesa, R., Cardeñoso, R., Matía, L., 2007. Contribution of the FPA tasting panel to decision
making about drinking water treatment facilities. Water Sci. Technol. 55, 127–135.
Drinking Water Directive, 1998. CD 98/83/EC4.11.1998. Off. J. EC L330:0032 – 005.
Fernandez-Turiel, J., Rodriguez, G., Carnicero, M., Valero, F., 2003. Spatial and seasonal var-
iations of wáter quality in a Mediterranean catchment: the Llobregat River(NE
Spain). Environ. Geochem. Health 25, 453–474.
Ferrer, A., 2007. Multivariate statistical process control based on principal component
analysis (MSPC-PCA): some reﬂections and a case study in a an autobody assembly
process. Qual. Eng. 19, 311–325.
Ferrer, O., Gibert, O., Cortina, J., 2016. Reverse osmosis membrane composition, structure
and performance modiﬁcation by bisulphite, iron(III), bromide and chlorite exposure.
Water Res. 103, 256–263.
Gibert, O., Pages, N., Bernat, X., Cortina, J.L., 2017. Removal of dissolved organic carbon and
bromide by a hybrid MIEX-ultraﬁltration system: insight into the behaviour of or-
ganic fractions. Chem. Eng. J. 312, 59–67.
Ginebreda, A., Barata, C., Barcelo, D., 2012. Risk assessment of pollutants in the Llobregat
River Basin. In: Sabater, S., et al. (Eds.), The Llobregat: The Story of a Polluted Medi-
terranean River. Hdb. Env. Chem. vol. 21. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 263–295.
Jolliffe, I.T., 2002. Principal Component Analysis. 2nd ed. Springer Verlag, Berlin, Germany.
Köck-Schulmeyer, M., Ginebreda, A., Postigo, C., López-Serna, R., Pérez, S., Brix, R., Llorca,
M., Petrović, M., Munné, A., Tirapu, L., Barceló, D., 2011. Wastewater reuse in Mediter-
ranean semi-arid areas: the impact of discharges of tertiary treated sewage on the
load of polar micro pollutants in the Llobregat river (NE Spain). Chemosphere 82,
670–678.
Kourti, T., MacGregor, J., 1996. Multivariate SPC methods for process and product moni-
toring. J. Qual. Technol. 28, 409–428.
Kuzmanovic, M., Ginebreda, A., Petrovic, M., Barceló, D., 2015. Risk assessment based pri-
oritization of 200 organic micropollutants in 4 Iberian rivers. Sci. Total Environ.
5003–5004, 289–299.
Ladrera, R., Cañedo-Argüelles, M., Prat, N., 2017. Impact of potash mining in streams: the
Llobregat basin (northeast Spain) as a case study. J. Limnol. 76 (2), 343–354.
López-Roldán, R., Rubalcaba, A., Martin-Alonso, J., González, S., Martí, V., Cortina, J.L., 2016.
Assessment of the water chemical quality improvement based on human health risk
indexes: application to a drinking water treatment plant incorporating membrane
technologies. Sci. Total Environ. 540, 334–343.
Marcé, R., Honey-Roses, J., Manzano, A., Moragas, L., Catllar, B., Sabater, S., 2012. The
Llobregat River Basin: a paradigm of impaired rivers under climate change threats.
In S. Sabater et al. (Eds.), The Llobregat: The Story of a Polluted Mediterranean
River. Hdb. Env. Chem., 21, 1–26. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Marlow, D., Moglia, M., Cook, S., Beale, D., 2013. Towards sustainable urban water man-
agement: a critical reassessment. Water Res. 47 (20), 7150–7161.
Martin-Alonso, J., Devesa, R., Matia, L., 2007. Managing an odour episode in barcelona's
water supply: strategies adopted, the causative agent(diacetyl) and determination
of its organoleptic properties. Water Sci. Technol. 55, 209–216.
McDonald, R., Douglas, I., Revenga, C., Hale, R., Grimm, N., Grönwall, J., Fekete, B., 2011.
Global urban growth and the geography of water availability, quality, and delivery.
Ambio 40, 437–446.
Momblanch, A., Paredes-Arquiola, J., Munne, A., Manzano, A., Arnau, J., Andreu, A., 2015.
Managing wáter quality under drought conditions in the Llobregat River basin. Sci.
Total Environ. 503-4, 300–318.
561
S. Platikanov et al. / Science of the Total Environment 667 (2019) 552–562


<!-- Page 11 -->
Mueller-Warrant, G., Grifﬁth, S., Whittaker, G., Banowetz, G., Pfender, W., Garcia., T.
Giannico, G., 2012. Impact of land use patterns and agricultural practices on water
quality in the Calapooia River basin of western Oregon. J. Soil Water Conserv. 67
(3), 183–201.
Mustonen, S., Tissari, S., Huikko, L., Kolehmainenm, S., Lehtola, M., Hirvonen, A., 2008.
Evaluating online data of water quality changes in a pilot drinking water distribution
system with multivariate data exploration methods. Water Res. 42, 2421–2430.
Navarro-Ortega, A., Acuña, V., Bellin, A., Burek, P., Cassiani, G., Choukr-Allah, R., et al.,
2015. Managing the effects of multiple stressors on aquatic ecosystems under
wáter scarcity. The Globaqua project. Sci. Total. Environ. 503–504, 3–9.
Raich-Montiu, J., Barios, J., Garcia, V., Medina, M.E., Valero, F., Devesa, R., Cortina, J.L., 2014.
Integrating membrane technologies and blending options in water production and
distribution systems to improve organoleptic properties. The case of the Barcelona
Metropolitan Area. J. Clean. Prod. 69, 250–259.
Rockström, J., Karlberg, L., 2010. The quadruple squeeze: deﬁning the safe operating space
for freshwater use to achieve a truply gren revolution in the Anthropocene. AMBIO
39, 257–265.
Romero, J., Ventura, F., Caixach, J., Rivera, J., Gode, L.X., Niñerola, J., 1998. Identiﬁcation of
1,3-Dioxanes and 1,3-Dioxolanes as malodorous compounds at trace levels in river,
water, groundwater, and tap water. Environ. Sci. Technol. 32, 206–216.
Ventura, F., Romero, J., Pares, J., 1997. Determination of dicyclopentadiene and its deriva-
tives as compounds cousing odors in groundwater suppliers. Environ. Sci. Technol.
31, 2368–2374.
Ventura, F., Boleda, M.R., Lloret, R., Martin-Alonso, J., 1998. Strategies for the identiﬁcation
of compounds causing odours in water: a study of creosote spills. Water Res. 32,
503–509.
Vera, M., Martín-Alonso, J., Mesa, J., Granados, M., Beltran, J.L., Casas, S., Gibert, O., Cortina,
J.L., 2017. Monitoring UF membrane performance treating surface-groundwater
blends: limitations of FEEM-PARAFAC on the assessment of the organic matter role.
Chem. Eng. J. 317, 961–997.
Versini, P., Pouget, L., McEnnis, S., Custodio, E., Escaler, I., 2016. Climate change impact on
water resources availability: case study of the Llobregat River basin (Spain). Hydrol.
Sci. J. 61, 2496–2508.
Volk, C., Wood, L., Johnson, B., Robinson, J., Zhu, H.W., Kaplan, L., 2002. Monitoring dis-
solved organic carbon in surface and drinking waters. J. Environ. Monit. 4, 43–47.
Wise, B.M., Gallagher, N.B., 1996. The process chemometrics approach to process moni-
toring and fault detection. J. Process Control 6, 329–348.
Wise, B.M., Ricker, N.L., Veltkamp, D.J., 1989. Upset and Sensor Failure Detection in Mul-
tivariate Processes. AIChE Annual Meeting.
562
S. Platikanov et al. / Science of the Total Environment 667 (2019) 552–562
