2.1.2    Artificial neural network
An  ANN  comprises  of  a  multitude  of  fundamental
neurons that mimic the learning process of the human
brain  for  solving  diverse  practical  issues.  As  a
representative  example  of  connectionist  learning,  the
ANN  is  one  of  the  most  frequently  used  models  in
machine  learning.  An  ANN  typically  contains  input,
hidden,  and  output  layers.  A  layer  can  have  a  few  to
millions  of  neurons,  and  the  number  of  neurons
determines  the  complexity  of  the  hidden  relationships
among the data to be learned. The input layer receives
training  data,  which  is  nonlinearly  varied  by  one  or
more  hidden  layers,  and  the  output  layer  outputs  the
nonlinearly transformed valuable data, thereby realizing
input-to-output  mapping.  ANN’s  ability  to  deal  with
complex  nonlinear  problems  can  be  increased  by
increasing  the  “depth”  (by  adding  more  layers),
increasing  the  “width”  (by  increasing  the  number  of
neurons in a single layer), and optimizing the activation
function.  The  ANN  can  be  employed  to  address
classification, regression, and time-series problems. It is
suitable for the resolving problems with varying sample
sizes through the multiple variants. The input data are
multivariate  and  can  be  continuous,  discrete,  or
matrix/image data.
Multilayer  perceptron  (MLP,  also  known  as  back-
propagation  neural  network  (BPNN))  (Fig.  3(a))  and
radial  basis  function  neural  network  (RBFNN)  (Fig.
3(b))  are  the  simplest  neural  networks,  typically
employed  to  address  regression  problems.  They  can
also be employed to address classification problems and
time  series  puzzles.  Compared  to  MLP  and  RBFNN,
deep neural network (DNN) (e.g., convolutional neural
network  (CNN)  (Fig.  3(c)),  recurrent  neural  network
(RNN)  (Fig.  3(d)),  and  graph  neural  network  (GNN))
possess  more  intricate  network  architectures  and  are
capable  of  autonomously  extracting  features,  which
reduces  the  necessity  for  human  intervention  and
enhances the quality of feature extraction (Zhang et al.,
2018). CNNs frequently utilize spatial or image data as
inputs  to  achieve  image  recognition  or  spatial  feature
extraction  through  convolutional  computation  (Zeiler
and  Fergus,  2014;  Gao  et al.,  2019;  Kiranyaz  et al.,
2021).  There  have  been  many  innovations  in  CNN,
such as GoogLeNet (Szegedy et al., 2015), depth-based
CNNs (Szegedy et al., 2016), DenseNet (Huang et al.,
2017),  wide  residual  networks  (Zagoruyko  and
Komodakis,  2016),  and  dual-channel  CNN  (Ma  et al.,
2023).  RNNs,  in  particular  long  short-term  memory
(LSTM)  (Greff  et al.,  2017),  demonstrate  certain
advantages
 when
 input
 data
 exhibit
 temporal
characteristics.  It  is  important  to  note  that  DNNs
present  a  challenge  in  terms  of  increased  model
complexity and reduced interpretability.
It should be noted that different neural networks may
apply  different  hidden  layer  activation  functions.  The
Table  S1  in  Appendix  A  provides  a  summary  of  the
hidden layer activation functions that may be employed.
In  contrast  to  the  conventional  S-type  activation
function,  wavelet  neural  network  (WNN)  employs  a
wavelet function as the hidden layer activation function
(Alexandridis  and  Zapranis,  2013).  Compared  to  the
traditional  MLP,  WNN  has  several  benefits  such  as
faster  network  convergence,  prevention  of  local
optimization,  and  the  ability  to  conduct  local  time-
frequency analysis.
The  application  of  ANN  is  pervasive  in  the
environmental  field,  encompassing  a  multitude  of
domains. These include the operation or optimization of
membrane  process  systems  (Wang  et al.,  2024b),
wastewater  treatment  (Al-Ghazawi  and  Alawneh,
2021),  prediction  of  novel  pollutants  such  as
disinfection by-products (Kulkarni and Chellam, 2010),
prediction  of  surface  or  groundwater  quality,  biogas
production  (Liu  et al.,  2021),  and  environmental
adsorption.
 
