<!-- Page 1 -->
Interpretable prediction of coagulant dosage in drinking water treatment 
plant based on automated machine learning and SHAP method
Liyan Feng a, Ying Zhang a,*, Xiaoting Wei d, Mengyuan Wang a, Zhiguang Niu a,  
Chenchen Wang b,c,**
a School of Environmental Science & Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China
b School of Environmental and Municipal Engineering, Tianjin Chengjian University, Tianjin 300384, China
c Tianjin Key Laboratory of Aquatic Science and Technology, Tianjin Chengjian University, Tianjin 300384, China
d Tianjin Teda Jinlian Water Supply Co., Ltd., Tianjin 300457, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Editor: Guangming Jiang
Keywords:
Automated machine learning
SHAP interpretability
Random Forest
Coagulant
Water treatment
A B S T R A C T
Accurate prediction of coagulant dosing is critical to ensure the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of the water 
treatment process. This study developed an accurate prediction model for coagulant dosing in drinking water 
treatment plants using automated machine learning (AutoML) and enhanced its transparency with the SHAP 
(Shapley Additive explanation) method. Results showed that the Random Forest (RF) model developed by 
AutoML outperformed the best single Gradient Boosting Tree model, with a 37 % lower RMSE of 0.89, a 52 % 
lower MAE of 0.47, and a 5 % higher R2 of 0.96. The RF model has the potential to save 10.25 % of coagulant 
dosage per year, specifically, 222 kg/d of PACl at a cost of 180.7 yuan/d for Yangtze River water, and 225 kg/ 
d at a cost of 183.2 yuan/d for Luan River water, while ensuring a more stable water quality in the treated water. 
SHAP analysis identified conductivity, ammonia nitrogen, chemical oxygen demand, and temperature of raw 
water as key factors affecting PACl dosage, which significantly impacts treated water pH. The combination of 
AutoML and SHAP method applied to intelligent water management, can bolster water treatment efficiency and 
management practices, resulting in noteworthy environmental, economic, and social benefits.
1. Introduction
With the rapid development of water treatment technologies, the 
issues of energy consumption and carbon emissions are becoming 
increasingly prominent [1,2]. In order to achieve the goal of green and 
low-carbon, traditional processes have been continuously optimized, 
but they are still subject to technical and economic constraints: 
adsorption technology is difficult to regenerate; photocatalytic deep 
mineralization is limited by the efficiency; and microwave catalytic ef­
ficiency is high, but the cost of the equipment is high [3–6]. Meanwhile, 
the complexity of the water treatment process places higher demands on 
the chemical dosing accuracy, especially in coagulation, whose oper­
ating cost accounts for a high proportion of the total cost of water plants 
[7,8], and multivariate (water temperature, pH, etc.), nonlinear dy­
namic response, and real-time disturbances make it difficult for tradi­
tional empirical models to balance dosing accuracy and energy 
efficiency [9,10]. Therefore, determining the optimal coagulant dosage 
based on raw water quality and established treated water quality criteria 
is critical to ensure water treatment effectiveness and to realize eco­
nomic and environmental benefits [11].
Traditional manual dosing is highly subjective, resulting in high drug 
consumption and difficult to adapt to large-scale production, resulting in 
insufficient stability of water control and regulatory lag [12]. Mecha­
nistic models, on the other hand, struggle to capture the complex re­
actions and nonlinear relationships within the coagulation process, 
thereby limiting their practical applicability [13]. Alternatively, data- 
driven models utilizing machine learning can construct black-box 
models for nonlinear, multivariate dynamic systems by learning from 
limited datasets [14]. However, current models have limitations in 
simulating and predicting anticoagulant dosing, particularly in terms of 
generalizability and convergence [15]. Among the existing methods for 
coagulation dosing prediction, DL-MV relies on parameter tuning for 
high-precision prediction [16]; PSO-SVR optimization requires manu­
ally preset parameters [17]; and GA-RF architectures are hardened and 
* Corresponding author.
** Corresponding author at: School of Environmental and Municipal Engineering, Tianjin Chengjian University, Tianjin 300384, China.
E-mail addresses: yzhang_n@tju.edu.cn (Y. Zhang), wcc12122008@163.com (C. Wang). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Water Process Engineering
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jwpe
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2025.107925
Received 25 January 2025; Received in revised form 1 May 2025; Accepted 9 May 2025  
Journal of Water Process Engineering 75 (2025) 107925 
Available online 15 May 2025 
2214-7144/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 


<!-- Page 2 -->
have high computational requirements [18]. These methods generally 
have two limitations: first, they rely on manual intervention, making it 
difficult to automate the adjustment of complex nonlinear water quality 
relationships; second, they adhere to a single optimization paradigm and 
lack dynamic synergistic mechanisms, resulting in limited predictive 
efficiency and generalizability.
Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) builds efficient ML pipelines 
by automating the entire process [19], and its distributed frameworks (e. 
g., TPOT) enable fully automated model filtering to reduce development 
costs and labor dependency [20]. Studies have shown that AutoML ex­
cels in hyperparameter optimization and complex constraint solving 
[21–24]. TPOT improves accuracy by 15–20 % without feature reduc­
tion for 50-dimensional water quality data [25]. The H2O framework 
accurately predicts biological nutrient removal in wastewater [26], and 
TPOT outperforms traditional ML by 1.4 % in the lake water quality 
classification task [27]. Nevertheless, its exploration and application in 
coagulation agent dosing prediction have not yet been extensively 
pursued.
While some studies have used advanced ML techniques, their black- 
box nature limits interpretability and hinders practical application in 
water treatment plants, where operational transparency is critical. The 
SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) method proposed by Lundberg 
and Lee [28], which significantly improves model transparency, credi­
bility, and decision making by quantifying the marginal contribution of 
features to model predictions and identifying key influences and their 
interaction effects through global and local analysis [29]. The SHAP 
method has been applied in many fields [30–34] and has been used with 
high accuracy for surface water quality prediction [35–37]. However, 
this method has not been applied to coagulant dosage prediction.
Based on existing research, this study applies the interpretable 
AutoML framework to coagulation dose prediction for the first time, 
constructs the prediction system through automated model selection 
and hyper-parameter optimization, and integrates the SHAP method to 
achieve the global feature importance and local decision interpretation 
of the black-box model. By using real-time data and historical infor­
mation, it ensures that the coagulation process can be accurately 
controlled while maintaining treated water quality standards, facili­
tating future technological advances and upgrades in the water treat­
ment industry.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Data acquisition and preprocessing
The data utilized in this study were sourced from a water treatment 
plant located in Tianjin, China. This plant receives water from two pri­
mary sources: the Luanhe River (for December, January and February 
annually), diverted from Hebei Province, and the Yangtze River (from 
March to November annually), originating from the Danjiangkou 
Reservoir in Hubei Province. The water treatment process involves pre- 
treatment, enhanced conventional treatment, and a combination of ul­
traviolet and chlorine disinfection. The daily treatment capacity of the 
water plant is 17.5 wt/d, and the hydraulic retention time is relatively 
stable at 25.56 min. The plant uses two types of coagulants: ferric 
chloride and PACl, which are dosed during the pretreatment and 
blending stages, respectively. Water quality parameters and coagulant 
dosing data were collected daily from October 2022 to May 2024, 
totaling 1339 data points. These data were randomly divided into a 
training set (1071 entries) and a test set (268 entries) in an 8: 2 ratio. The 
feature variables consist of inflow rate (WTR) and water quality in­
dicators such as temperature (T), pH, turbidity (NTU), and electrical 
conductivity (EC), and chemical oxygen demand determined by potas­
sium permanganate (CODMn) for both raw water (RW) and treated water 
(TW), with ammonia nitrogen (NH3−N) being considered only for raw 
water. Based on practical plant operations and professional evaluations, 
the dosing amounts of the two coagulants are comparable, with a 
maximum discrepancy not exceeding 5 mg/L. Therefore, PACl was used 
as the only target variable for accurate simulation of coagulant dosing in 
this study.
During data collection, the occurrence of detection errors and dosing 
system malfunctions resulted in the raw data set containing problems 
such as missing values and noise. Therefore, preprocessing is essential to 
improve data reliability, model performance, and decision quality [38]. 
In this study, the K-nearest neighbor (KNN, k = 4) estimation model was 
used to deal with missing data, which balances interpolation stability 
and global representativeness, and provides better data retention for 
non-randomly missing key parameters (e.g., water temperature, 
ammonia nitrogen). The interpolation effect in the range of k = 1–10 
was searched through the grid and the mean square error (MSE) was 
used as the evaluation criterion, and the results showed that the MSE 
was minimized on the test set at k = 4. In addition, noise and random 
errors were mitigated using a moving average filter with a window size 
of n = 5, determined based on an autocorrelation function (ACF) anal­
ysis, a value that effectively captures short-term fluctuations in water 
quality parameters while avoiding excessive smoothing that leads to 
peak attenuation [39].
To investigate the correlations between various features such as 
WTR, raw water quality indicators, treated water quality indicators, and 
coagulant dosage, we used the Spearman rank correlation coefficient 
(rs) method, which is known for its low sensitivity to nonlinear re­
lationships and outliers. By excluding features with low correlations, we 
reduced redundant features to reduce the input dimensionality of the 
model, thereby improving both the operational efficiency and general­
ization capabilities of the model. A flowchart illustrating the modeling 
methodology is shown in Fig. 1.
2.2. Automated machine learning
AutoML is a technique for automating the machine learning process 
through algorithms, including feature engineering, algorithm selection, 
and hyperparameter optimization [40]. Its primary goal is to reduce the 
need for human intervention while improving model performance. In 
this study, the Tree-based Pipeline Optimization Tool (TPOT), an 
AutoML tool based on genetic programming, is used to automate model 
construction. TPOT is an open source Python-based AutoML library 
(version 0.11.7) with underlying dependencies on Scikit-Learn (version 
1.0.2), DEAP (Distributed Evolutionary Algorithms Framework), and 
extensions such as XGBoost [27]. The model runs in a Python 3.8 
environment, and the full configuration code for TPOT is open source.
In this study, the TPOT framework is adopted to automate the design 
of machine learning pipelines, whose core mechanisms are: iterative 
optimization based on tree-structured coding of genetic programming, 
integration of Scikit-Learn multi-algorithms with predefined hyper- 
parameter space to balance the search efficiency; and screening of the 
Pareto-optimal pipeline by repeating the 10-fold cross-validation (run 
independently for 3 times) to ensure the model generalization perfor­
mance [41].
2.3. SHAP interpretability method
The SHAP methodology encompasses Kernel SHAP, Deep SHAP, and 
Tree SHAP [42]. This study used the Tree SHAP package in Python 3.9 to 
analyze the importance, dependencies, and interactions of features. The 
modules and functions used in Python are listed in Table 1. The average 
absolute SHAP values were used to evaluate the importance of different 
factors in determining the dosage amount. By summing the average 
absolute SHAP values for all relevant environmental parameters, their 
combined impact on dosing strategies was quantified. Dependency plots 
of SHAP values revealed interactions between features and their col­
lective contribution to the prediction of dosing strategies for the coag­
ulation process [43]. Two typical samples were selected to generate 
local interpretability plots, waterfall plots, and decision plots in order to 
L. Feng et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Journal of Water Process Engineering 75 (2025) 107925 
2 


<!-- Page 3 -->
illustrate feature importance and decision-making mechanisms within 
the samples.
2.4. Model evaluation
Root mean square error (RMSE), mean absolute error (MAE), and 
coefficient of determination (R2) were used as evaluation metrics to 
assess the reliability and accuracy of the predictive models [44]. RMSE 
assesses the degree of discrepancy between predicted and actual values 
within a sample set [45]. It has an increased sensitivity to outliers and 
acts as a metric of model accuracy by calculating the average size of 
prediction errors. MAE reflects the average discrepancy between pre­
dicted and actual values, with values closer to zero indicating superior 
model performance [10]. R2 quantifies the fit of model predictions to 
actual data, assessing the robustness and reliability of the model. A value 
of R2 approaching one indicates a higher correlation between the 
dependent and independent variables, which indicates a better model fit 
and consequently smaller prediction errors [46].
