2.2. Physicochemical analytical methods
HRT, SRT, and FLUX were recorded as routine operational parame­
ters. TCOD and SCOD were determined by the APHA 5220D closed 
reflux colorimetric method, and MLSS and MLVSS were measured ac­
cording to Standard Methods [28]. SMP was defined as the dissolved 
fraction of the supernatant after 0.45 μm membrane filtration and EPS 
was extracted from the residual biomass using the heat method [29]. 
Proteins and polysaccharides in SMP and EPS, including SMPp, SMPc, 
EPSp, and EPSc, were quantified using the Modified Lowry Protein 
Assay and Dubois Method, respectively [30]. Liquid chromatography­
–organic carbon detection (LC-OCD) was employed to characterize the 
dissolved organic matter, including biopolymers with molecular weight 
(MW) greater than 20 kDa and low-molecular-weight (LMW) com­
pounds with MW less than 1000 Da, such as humics, building blocks, 
LMW acids, and LMW neutrals. The particle size distribution (PSD) of 
mixed liquor was analyzed using a laser diffraction particle analyzer. 
Capillary suction time (CST) was measured using a CST apparatus [31]. 
Total organic carbon (TOC) was measured using a TOC analyzer 
(TOC-VCSH, Shimadzu, Japan). Excitation–emission matrix (EEM) 
spectra were measured using a fluorescence spectrophotometer [32]. 
Total iron was measured using inductively coupled plasma optical 
emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES).
Fig. 2. Operational context of the target MBR plant and source–target dataset characteristics: (a) TMP profile of the target plant during the monitoring period, (b) 
photograph of the MBR module at the target plant, (c) distributions of the operational and physicochemical variables in the three source plants and the target plant, 
(d) mean values of these variables for each plant.
X. Han et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Journal of Membrane Science 758 (2026) 126065 
4 


<!-- Page 5 -->
