Membrane bioreactor
Dissolved oxygen-reduction tank
Swing basin
Nitrogen removal
Machine learning
Bioinspired optimization
A B S T R A C T
Conventional membrane bioreactor (MBR) systems often experience reduced nitrification at low temperatures 
and limited denitrification under high dissolved oxygen conditions, resulting in insufficient total nitrogen (TN) 
removal. To overcome these limitations, this study proposes a novel configuration that integrates a swing basin 
to enhance nitrification during cold periods and a dissolved oxygen reduction (DO-R) tank to improve denitri­
fication by minimizing oxygen interference. Moreover, the complexity of the MBR system necessitated machine 
learning (ML)-based optimization to enhance TN removal while maintaining effective chemical oxygen demand 
(COD) and total phosphorus (TP) removal. Long-term operational data (>1 year) from a full-scale wastewater 
treatment plant in South Korea with a treatment capacity of 25,000 m³ /d were analyzed using ML algorithms. 
The random forest ML model outperformed the deep neural network, achieving a lower RMSE for TN prediction 
(1.73 vs. 2.81). Shapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) analysis revealed that the swing basin enhances nitrifi­
cation by flexibly switching between aerobic and anoxic modes, thereby increasing the effective aerobic volume 
and hydraulic retention time under low-temperature conditions. In addition, the DO-R tank improved denitri­
fication by lowering DO levels, eliminating competition between oxygen and nitrate. The Harris Hawks bio- 
inspired optimization algorithm achieved the most accurate convergence, identifying an optimal DO-R tank 
sludge return flow rate of 146.23 m³ /d and yielding effluent COD, TN, and TP concentrations of 5.96, 5.26, and 
0.06 mg/L, respectively. Integrating the proposed configuration with ML-driven optimization provides a 
mechanism-based strategy for improving TN removal, significantly enhancing nitrogen removal in full-scale MBR 
systems.
1. Introduction
