In the 100-day operation process, the system transitioned from 
startup to stable operation. Sludge samples were collected daily at fixed 
locations and fixed times throughout this period. These samples were 
examined using bright field microscopy (Leica DM500, Wetzlar, Ger­
many) at 40 × magnification. Timely images were taken with an 
attached digital camera, and some images were adjusted for depth of 
field to ensure clarity. To enhance model generalization ability and 
robustness, a total of 862 images were combined from this study and a 
previous work (Dai et al., 2020). For data acquisition, conforming data 
corresponding to each stage’s characteristics in the experiment under­
went initial pre-processing and classification into four distinct stages 
based on the morphological features and size variation of AGS, namely: 
initial stage (IS), growth stage (GS), maturity stage (MS), and cleavage 
stage (CS) (Yang et al., 2023). Specific classification rules and demon­
strations were presented in Table 1 and Fig. 1.
In this study, the target detection annotation tool (Labelimg v1.8.6) 
was used to annotate the AGS image dataset across its life-cycle. The 
annotation included the location and centroid information of the targets, 
and the results were stored in TXT files. The dataset was divided into a 
training set (690 images) and a testing set (172 images) at a ratio of 80% 
and 20%. A random seed was set to ensure the reproducibility of the 
results.
The annotation process was as follows: First, a portion of the 
Y. Zeng et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Journal of Environmental Management 384 (2025) 125527 
2 


<!-- Page 3 -->
microscopic images from the sample set was selected for the training and 
testing sets. The images were imported into Labelimg, and the target 
regions were selected using the mouse. The corresponding “YOLO” label 
categories were then chosen. When a single image contained multiple 
sludge particles, each particle was annotated according to its respective 
life-cycle stage. After the annotation was completed, the results were 
exported as TXT files. The images and their corresponding TXT files for 
the training and testing sets were then imported into their respective 
folders to complete the data preparation. Throughout the annotation 
process, manual annotation was strictly performed in accordance with 
the rules outlined in Table 1 to ensure annotation accuracy.
2.3. Machine learning model
