In this study, YOLOv8 was utilized to extract supervised information 
from each image, including the precise location and category parame­
ters of the detected objects. After all datasets were classified based on 
these criteria, an object detection dataset annotation tool (Labelimg 
v1.8.6) was employed to set the center position, height, width, and class 
of each identified object to annotate the object position in each image. 
These results were then normalized, with the entire process illustrated in 
Fig. 2.
The Darknet-53 network is based on the use of residual and skip 
connections to effectively capture features at various scales and levels 
(Redmon and Farhadi, 2018), whose core idea can be described as the 
combination of a fundamental feature extraction framework and a re­
sidual module (Kaiming and Jian, 2014; Kaiming et al., 2015). In this 
study, it served as the foundation for extracting features from the input 
images (Redmon and Farhadi, 2017), where the network backbone 
employed a comprehensive gradient flow structure, with different 
channel numbers adjusted for diverse scale models. The neck section 
incorporated a bidirectional path network to introduce a bottom-up path 
that facilitated the transmission of low-level information to the top of 
the upper layers, while, in the head section, a contemporary decoupled 
head structure was adopted to distinguish between classification and 
detection heads. This approach enables direct prediction of the object 
centers instead of calculating offsets from predefined anchor frames. 
Additionally, for enhancing model precision and efficiency, this work 
integrated the Simple Attention Mechanism (SimAM) into the utilized 
network, enabling inference of three-dimensional attention weights 
within network layers without introducing additional parameters (Yang 
et al., 2021).
The image sizes were normalized in this study, followed by initiali­
zation of the model weights for training from scratch. Comprehensively 
considering both the results of model training and computational effi­
ciency, the number of training iterations was set to 100 with a batch size 
of 16 images. The initial learning rate was set to 0.01 and gradually 
adjusted to achieve the minimum prediction error. To prevent over­
fitting, an early stop strategy was adopted (Hanwen et al., 2019), which 
Table 1 
Classification of AGS whole life-cycle images.
Labels
Equivalent Size 
(μm)
Shape
Roughness
Color
IS
200–800
Irregular 
shape
Rough
Yellow, brown
GS
800–1600
Rough Circles
Rough
Yellow, brown, dark 
brown
MS
800–3000
Circles and 
ovals
Smooth
Dark brown, black
CS
1600–3000
Cracked 
shape
Rough
Dark brown, black
Fig. 1. Image of AGS over its whole life-cycle: (a) Initial stage; (b) Growth stage; (c) Maturity stage; (d) Cleavage stage.
Y. Zeng et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Journal of Environmental Management 384 (2025) 125527 
3 


<!-- Page 4 -->
terminated the training process if no improvement was observed during 
iteration. Additionally, in order to enhance prediction accuracy effec­
tively, the Mosaic enhancement was turned off during the last 10 rounds 
of iteration in the data augmentation part of training (Alexey et al., 
2020). During the forward propagation stage, the input samples were 
sequentially processed through each layer of the neural network until 
generating the predicted results. Once the neural network predictions 
were obtained, they were compared with the actual labels using a loss 
function to quantify their differences. By applying the chain rule, the 
gradients of the loss function were back-propagated from the output 
layer to input layer and further propagated back to the weights and 
biases at each layer. Once the back-propagation completed and the 
gradients for each parameter obtained, the network parameters could be 
updated using the gradient descent algorithm for the forward-backward 
propagation process in subsequent training iterations. Through contin­
uous parameter adjustment and loss function minimization, the neural 
networks can gradually improve performance and accuracy. During the 
prediction stage, the Soft non-maximum suppression (soft-NMS) algo­
rithm was employed to smoothly suppress the detection box results that 
exhibited higher overlap with the local maximum values (Navaneeth 
et al., 2017).
In order to enhance the efficiency of the experiment and practical 
application capabilities, this study utilized a cloud-based graphics pro­
cessing unit (GPU) platform called Featurize. The hardware configura­
tion included an RTX3060 graphics card with 12 GB of graphics memory 
and a Central Processing Unit (CPU) consisting of 6 × E5 2680 v4, along 
with 28 GB of RAM and a 50 GB disk stora ge capacity. The runtime 
environment employed Python v3.10.12 and the PyTorch v2.0.1 ma­
chine learning library.
2.4. Model evaluation
