A confusion matrix primarily serves the purpose of juxtaposing the 
classification results with actual measurements, which can effectively 
illustrate the accuracy of the classification outcomes and is a widely used 
tool for visually evaluating the effectiveness of supervised learning al­
gorithms. Moreover, the most commonly employed metric for assessing 
imbalanced classification performance is derived from the confusion 
matrix (Luque et al., 2019). In the resulting matrix shown in Fig. 4, the 
main diagonal line represents the proportion of correctly predicted 
values compared to their true counterparts, while other positions indi­
cate different types of mis-classifications presented in a 5 × 5 format.
Background, as a category, refers to the background part of an image 
that is typically distinguished from the target or foreground. As illus­
trated in Fig. 4, both IS and CS images exhibited the highest correct 
prediction rate in the test set, reaching 0.97 each. However, approxi­
mately 0.03 images of IS and CS were misclassified as GS due to their 
similarity at the critical values since GS represents the subsequent stage 
of IS in its life-cycle. Additionally, when granule sizes were closely 
aligned, GS and CS displayed rough edges and appeared similar to each 
other. The correct prediction rate for GS images was 0.96 with around 
0.04 GS images being mistakenly classified as CS for similar reasons 
mentioned earlier. On the other hand, MS images had the lowest correct 
prediction rate at 0.94, where approximately 0.02 MS images were 
wrongly identified as GS while another 0.04 MS images were mis­
classified as CS due to their resemblance with AGS before and after this 
particular stage of development, and smaller ones being predicted as GS 
while larger ones being labeled as CS. In all instances where the back­
ground was incorrectly predicted as the target, AGS accounted for the 
proportions of 0.38, 0.38, 0.15, and 0.08 across different stages of its 
life-cycle depending on granule size, indicating that larger granules 
occupied more image area, resulting in higher probability of being 
classified correctly. Research indicates that the improved YOLOv7 un­
derwater object detection model achieves accuracy rates of 81% for 
conch species, 90% for sea urchin species, 89% for scallop species, and 
89% for starfish species (Liu et al., 2023). Due to the particularities of 
Fig. 3. The results of various loss functions and evaluation indexes in the process of 100 rounds of model iteration: (a), (b) and (c) are the results of iterations of box 
loss, cls loss and dlf loss on the training set, respectively; (d), (e) and (f) are the results of iterations of box loss, cls loss and dlf loss on the test set, respectively; (g) and 
(h) are the results of precision and recall on the test set; (i) and (j) are the results of mAP 50 and mAP50-95 on the test set.
Y. Zeng et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Journal of Environmental Management 384 (2025) 125527 
6 


<!-- Page 7 -->
the underwater environment, such as poor lighting conditions, optical 
properties of water, and dynamically changing backgrounds, the 
distinction between targets and backgrounds becomes challenging. In 
this study, the interference from the background was minimal, hence the 
probability of AGS being correctly identified and classified was higher, 
which was also related to the standardized collection method of AGS 
micrographs.
3.3. Analysis of the model evaluation parameter
