To validate the practical application of the model, images of AGS 
were collected from the AGS-MBR reactor over one week in the labo­
ratory. Microscopic imaging was performed under consistent equipment 
and environmental conditions. The resulting images were then imported 
into the model for prediction, as illustrated in Fig. 8.
The AGS with larger sizes, such as MS and CS, are more likely to be 
detected and less likely to be missed (Fig. 8(a)–(c)). Conversely, the AGS 
with smaller sizes, such as IS and GS, have a higher probability of being 
missed (Fig. 8(d)–8(f)). When there is a certain degree of gap between 
the sludge granules, the prediction accuracy improves. However, if the 
gap is too small, instances of missed detection may occur. The prediction 
performance was enhanced under clean background conditions, but 
might be influenced by complex interference in the surrounding envi­
ronment. The counting results were derived based on these predicted 
outcomes, and the various types could be counted in multiple batches, 
with the calculation time varying according to the computing power. In 
this model, preprocessing of each image required 2.6–3.4 ms, inference 
took 10.0–10.4 ms, and post-processing for statistical overlay consumed 
Fig. 6. The t-SNE cluster analysis of all classes.
Fig. 7. Analysis of the SHAP feature interpretability of all classes.
Y. Zeng et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Journal of Environmental Management 384 (2025) 125527 
9 


<!-- Page 10 -->
1.6–1.8 ms, summing up to a total processing time of 14.2–15.6 ms. The 
model was used to develop statistical functions for performing analysis 
on AGS samples collected from the four previously mentioned stages, 
where each day’s sample constituted a separate batch. The results are 
presented in Fig. 9.
As depicted in Fig. 9, the number of IS was the highest in each batch, 
with a total exceeding 700, followed by GS, while MS and CS exhibit the 
lowest number. This distribution suggested that the overall AGS was 
currently in a fragmentation phase, undergoing regeneration and 
gradual growth. Although IS had the highest count in the reactor, 
exceeding 700, the number alone could not serve as the sole criterion for 
determining the most dominant category, given that IS typically had a 
smaller granularity. In contrast, CS, being the category with the largest 
granularity, had a total count surpassing that of MS, indicating that the 
volume proportion of CS was certainly greater than that of MS. There­
fore, it could be inferred that a significant portion of AGS in the reactor 
was currently in the CS state. The breakdown of CS into the IS state(Yang 
et al., 2023) likely accounted for the increased number of IS instances. 
At present, the number of MS in the MBR was not substantial, and it did 
not represent a dominant state. Under these circumstances, managers 
should consider measures such as increasing the organic load and con­
trolling hydraulic shear forces to promote AGS granulation, thereby 
increasing the proportion of MS AGS in the system (Lin et al., 2020). The 
statistical function of the model intuitively presents the quantity of each 
type of AGS in each batch and the total number of each type throughout 
the entire cycle, reflecting its real-time status in the MBR system. This 
provides valuable guidance for managers in selecting appropriate 
operating parameters and enhancing the maintenance efficiency of the 
MBR.
4. Conclusions
