In the context of machine learning models, SHAP elucidates the 
impact of each sample and feature on the respective predicted value 
(Wang et al., 2024). By utilizing the SHapley value, it can quantify the 
local interpretation of the model, providing insights into the rationale 
behind the decision-making for a specific sample (Qi et al., 2025). In this 
section, it was first loaded the test images from each life-cycle, their 
dimensions were sorted out, and then a model prediction function was 
constructed after preprocessing. Considering the computation time and 
pixel granularity, an appropriate number of iterations were set to 
initialize the explainer, and the corresponding Shapley values were 
calculated for each category, test image, and pixel, and finally the heat 
map was generated as shown in Fig. 7.
The model primarily focused on capturing global features of small- 
grained images and edge features of large-grained images. As shown 
in Fig. 7, the global features in the IS and GS test images significantly 
influenced the model’s predictions for MS. Specifically, the global fea­
tures in IS and GS images, such as color variations and rough edges, 
provided the model with key information to distinguish between these 
two stages. The presence of these features enabled the model to more 
accurately identify the MS stage, as images in the MS stage typically had 
different colors and smoother edges. Furthermore, the edge features 
contained in the MS test images also had an adverse effect on the 
model’s predictions for IS and GS. This indicated that there were sig­
nificant morphological differences between IS, GS, and MS. IS and GS 
could be distinguished by their color variations and rough edges, while 
MS was characterized mainly by dark brown or black colors and smooth 
edges. This finding further validated the rationality of the aforemen­
tioned classification criteria. The internal structure and detailed features 
in the CS test images had a significant impact on the predictions for IS, as 
AGS fragments from CS re-emerged as IS AGS, thereby initiating a new 
Y. Zeng et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Journal of Environmental Management 384 (2025) 125527 
8 


<!-- Page 9 -->
life-cycle iteration. This process not only revealed the dynamic changes 
in the AGS life-cycle but also emphasized the model’s capability in 
capturing key features of these changes.
In summary, the model captures key features of different stages, 
effectively distinguishing each life-cycle phase of AGS. These findings 
not only validate the rationality of the classification criteria but also 
provide a new perspective for understanding the life-cycle of AGS.
3.6. Model prediction and statistics
