1. Introduction
In the near future, humans will use and pollute freshwater at levels 
where water scarcity could limit food production, ecosystem func­
tioning, and urban water supply (Jury and Vaux, 2007). The water in­
dustry has identified wastewater as a viable and sustainable source of 
resource recovery (Winkler and van Loosdrecht, 2022), and activated 
sludge is at the core of wastewater treatment technologies (van Loos­
drecht and Brdjanovic, 2014). Among the wastewater treatment tech­
nologies, the anaerobic membrane bioreactor (AnMBR) is a promising 
solution because of its low operational cost, reduced waste sludge pro­
duction, and high potential for energy recovery (Ho and Sung, 2010; 
Pretel et al., 2015; Robles et al., 2022). By integrating anaerobic 
digestion with membrane filtration, AnMBRs not only achieves effective 
wastewater treatment but also facilitates resource recovery, such as 
biogas production, rendering it an effective technology for a circular 
economy and sustainable development (Krzeminski et al., 2017; 
Moideen et al., 2023). Additionally, AnMBRs offer a fast start-up and a 
smaller footprint for wastewater treatment (Robles et al., 2018). How­
ever, the development of AnMBRs primarily relies on laboratory ex­
periments, followed by pilot-scale trial (Q. Li et al., 2024; Z. Li et al., 
2024; Ren et al., 2024). Operating such systems generally consumes 
large amounts of chemical reagents, needs professional equipment 
support (Li et al., 2022), and requires months to years, rendering them 
time- and resource-intensive. These constraints on laboratory resources 
and space further limit the number and duration of reactor runs, 
impeding the development of AnMBRs.
To overcome these constraints, data-driven modeling, particularly 
machine learning (ML), has gained considerable attention as a tool for 
advancing AnMBR technologies and processes (Li et al., 2022; Robles 
et al., 2018; Wang and Li, 2024). ML models enable simulations of 
reactor performance by utilizing operational parameters and influent 
water quality as inputs and predicting effluent water quality as outputs 
(Li et al., 2022; Mahanna et al., 2024; Pal et al., 2024). This approach 
facilitates the analysis of the complex relationships between influent and 
effluent characteristics and offers valuable insights into reactor 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: kikaen@ifi.u-tokyo.ac.jp, kikaen@tohoku.ac.jp (J. Ji). 
1 These authors contributed equally to this work.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Environmental Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jenvman
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2026.128801
Received 12 December 2025; Received in revised form 21 January 2026; Accepted 30 January 2026  
Journal of Environmental Management 401 (2026) 128801 
Available online 9 February 2026 
0301-4797/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc-nd/4.0/ ). 


<!-- Page 2 -->
operation and performance optimization. In addition, ML-based simu­
lations provide a cost-effective alternative to traditional experimental 
methods, enabling the evaluation of numerous potential operational 
scenarios with minimal resource consumption. Such capabilities are 
particularly valuable for guiding the design and operation of AnMBR 
systems, particularly in contexts where real-world experiments are 
impractical or resource constrained.
However, the application of ML in AnMBR modeling remains chal­
lenging. One major obstacle is the significant heterogeneity of AnMBR 
systems, which stems from variations in the microbial community 
structures, physical configurations, and influent water quality. These 
factors fundamentally affect reactor performance and resource recovery 
efficiency. For instance, Ji et al. (2020) observed that the membrane 
pore size in an AnMBR can influence the effluent chemical oxygen de­
mand (COD) concentrations and the reactor's microbial composition (Ji 
et al., 2020), thereby affecting the effluent quality and resource recovery 
efficiency. This variability limits the development of generalized ML 
models that can be reliably applied to different reactors and environ­
mental conditions. Instead, ML models often require customization to 
account for the unique configurations of individual reactors. This de­
mands for tailored modeling for flexible and adaptive approaches for 
ML-driven AnMBR optimization. Another complication is that devel­
oping effective ML models for AnMBR systems involves a series of 
complex tasks, including ML algorithm selection and hyperparameter 
optimization, which typically require substantial ML expertise (He et al., 
2021; Karmaker (“Santu”) et al., 2021). To address these challenges, 
automated machine learning (AutoML) has emerged as a promising 
solution to reduce the complexity of repetitive tasks in ML pipelines 
(Truong et al., 2019). Although ML models have been implemented in 
MBRs, their real-world uptake remains limited. AutoML has been 
highlighted as a promising method for facilitating the practical 
deployment of ML models (Lai et al., 2024). In particular, AutoML 
automates key steps, such as ML algorithm selection and hyper­
parameter optimization, thereby reducing the technical complexity and 
time required for developing high-performance ML models. In addition, 
by democratizing access to ML techniques, AutoML has the potential to 
empower a wider range of users to leverage data-driven approaches in 
AnMBR development, thereby fostering broader adoption and innova­
tion in this field (Li et al., 2021).
This study aims to leverage an AutoML framework for rapid 
modeling of the complex nonlinear dynamics of the AnMBR during 
wastewater treatment. Within the proposed rapid modeling framework, 
we investigated the impact of increasing the features (predictive vari­
ables) and training dataset size on the model performance by comparing 
the results with those of existing models based on neural networks. 
Additionally, we proposed an ensemble learning interpretation frame­
work to explain the AutoML-based model. The findings of this study 
contribute to the broader application of AutoML in wastewater treat­
ment reactor modeling and provide valuable guidance for developing 
effective models for AnMBR systems.
