2.2. Modeling
The model of AnMBR is constructed as follows: 
Y = fθ(X),
(1) 
where Y is the COD-re, X is the matrix of input features, and fθ is the 
model parameterized with θ. Data-driven modeling aims to estimate the 
optimal set of parameters, θ, that best represents the given data.
However, identifying suitable model parameters can be difficult 
because the process often depends on appropriately configuring hyper­
parameters (e.g., learning rate, batch size, epochs for neural networks, 
estimator number, learning rate, and maximum depth of tree for tree- 
based models) to guide the learning process. Hyperparameters are set­
tings that influence the training process and model performance but are 
not learned through the training process.
Hyperparameter tuning is a crucial step in optimizing the model's 
performance. Common methods for hyperparameter optimization 
include grid search, random search, Bayesian optimization, and genetic 
algorithms. Although these methods assist in hyperparameter tuning, 
they often require substantial ML expertise and computational re­
sources, which limit their accessibility. Consequently, AutoML has been 
developed to streamline the process of hyperparameter tuning and make 
it more accessible.
In this study, we employed a Fast Library for AutoML and tuning 
(FLAML), supporting fast and economical automatic tuning for machine 
learning (Wang et al., 2021b). This library selects a search order opti­
mized for both computational cost and model error, iteratively selecting 
the models, hyperparameters, sample size, and resampling strategy. 
FLAML demonstrated remarkable performance, outperforming other 
leading libraries of AutoML (e.g., Auto-sklearn, H2O AutoML, and 
Alpine Meadow) (Wang et al., 2021b). Studies from environmental 
sciences, atmospheric sciences, and climate sciences are benefited from 
this package (Dong et al., 2025; Xia et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023). As 
tree-based models are suitable for tabular data, they were selected as 
base candidates for the FLAML model selection process, including the 
random forests (RF) (Breiman, 2001), extremely randomized trees 
(Geurts et al., 2006), XGBoost (a scalable end-to-end tree boosting sys­
tem) (Chen and Guestrin, 2016), LightBGM (a highly efficient gradient 
boosting decision tree) (Ke et al., 2017), and Catboost (gradient boosting 
with categorical features support) (Dorogush et al., 2018). FLAML im­
plements a Cost-Frugal Optimization (CFO) strategy, which starts with a 
low-cost configuration (e.g., small model size) and iteratively moves to 
more complex configurations only when the performance gain justifies 
the additional computational cost (Wu et al., 2021). Thus, this method 
can control cost during the optimization process compared to traditional 
hyperparameters optimization processes. Further, BlendSearch was 
applied by default, which is a hierarchical search algorithm that com­
bines global exploration with local optimization to minimize the total 
cost spent in finding good configurations (Wang et al., 2021a). The 
optimization process was constrained by a global time budget of 300 s. 
The optimization will be terminated when time budget is exhausted. To 
prevent overfitting, we adopted a 5-fold cross-validation strategy with a 
mean squared error (MSE) criterion during each AutoML optimization. 
Notably, the search spaces for the select learners above are dynamically 
included the number of estimators, number of leaves, learning rate, and 
regularization parameters. The specific search ranges were then deter­
mined by CFO strategy based on the training dataset size. The optimal 
sets of hyperparameters and settings of all models are provided in 
Supporting Information.
