2.1. Data
The data were obtained from two AnMBRs that operated continu­
ously in long-term experiments treating municipal sewage (Ji et al., 
Fig. 1. Overview of the workflow. (a) Flowchart of AnMBR experiment. (b) Modeling framework. T-R: reactor operation temperature; pH-in: influent pH; T-in: 
influent temperature; T-env: environment temperature; COD-in: influent chemical oxygen demand; OD: operation days; ORP: oxidation-reduction potential; HRTs: 
hydraulic retention times; MLSS: mixed liquor suspended solids; MLVSS: mixed liquor volatile suspended solids; FLMAL: the automated machine learning package; 
FCN: fully connected network; CNN: convolutional neural network; and DenseNet: densely connected convolutional network. Tree-based, permutation, and SHAP 
indicate different interpretation methods for machine learning models.
J. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Journal of Environmental Management 401 (2026) 128801 
2 


<!-- Page 3 -->
2020, 2021a, 2021b). The volume of each reactor was 20 L, and the 
reactors were installed at a wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) for 
better access to raw municipal sewage. The membrane modules used in 
both AnMBRs were hollow fiber polyvinylidene difluoride membranes, 
but with pore sizes of 0.4 μ m and 0.05 μ m. The operating temperature 
was maintained between 20 ◦C and 25 ◦C using water baths (NTT-20S, 
EYELA, Japan). Hydraulic retention times (HRTs) of 4–24 h were 
applied to AnMBR1, whereas HRTs of 10–24 h were applied to AnMBR2. 
Additional details, including the basic water quality of the raw munic­
ipal wastewater, experimental equipment, and conditions, have been 
reported in previous studies (Ji et al., 2020, 2021a, 2021b). The COD, 
mixed liquor suspended solids (MLSS), and mixed liquor volatile sus­
pended solids (MLVSS) were measured by standard methods 
(Bridgewater et al., 2017). The MLSS and MLVSS data were sampled 
weekly, and these data were filled using linear interpolation to match 
the frequency of COD data. The oxidation-reduction potential (ORP) of 
the anaerobically activated sludge was measured using an ORP meter 
(TOADKK, RM-30P, Japan). A total of 11 features were included in this 
study, including the reactor operation days (OD; Unit: day), reactor 
operation temperature (T-R; Unit: ◦C), influent temperature (T-in; Unit: 
◦C), environment temperature (T-env; Unit: ◦C), influent pH (pH-in; 
Unitless), influent COD (COD-in; Unit: mg/L), flux (Unit: m/day), ORP 
(Unit: mV), HRT (Unit: hour), MLSS (Unit: mg/L), and MLVSS (Unit: 
mg/L). The output was the COD removal rate (COD-re; Unit: %). The 
total sample size of this dataset was 185, which was divided into training 
and testing sets using a 9:1 split ratio (166:19) in previous study (Li 
et al., 2022). The above data was obtained by running the reactors in 
50–414 days.
We designed comparative studies to investigate: (1) the permanence 
of AutoML, (2) the impact of feature selection on modeling performance, 
and (3) the effects of data volume (Fig. 1). First, for comparing with the 
previous models, we used the same training set and testing data as in a 
previous study that applied deep learning models, in which T-R, T-in, T- 
env, pH-in, COD-in, and flux were used as inputs and COD-re was used as 
a label (Li et al., 2022). The results of deep learning networks from Li 
et al. (2022), including a fully connected network (FCN), a convolu­
tional neural network (CNN), and a densely connected convolutional 
network (DenseNet), were adopted. These existing models serve as 
baselines (Fig. 1). Subsequently, we examined feature contribution by 
integrating OD, ORP, HRT, MLSS, and MLVSS (more feature modeling 
experiment in Fig. 1). These variables were analysed through both in­
dividual and combined inclusion to delineate their effects on modeling 
performance. Lastly, to explore whether the size of the training dataset 
would improve ML model performance, we used additional data 
collected from longer operational times of the same AnMBRs (more data 
modeling experiment in Fig. 1). The sample size of the additional data 
was 135, which was obtained by running the reactors in 7–546 days. In 
addition to benchmarking against Li et al. (2022), we employed 10-fold 
cross-validation to evaluate the AutoML models. During 10-fold 
cross-validation, 10 independent models were trained, with each itera­
tion using a distinct 90% training and 10% testing split. This approach 
assesses the variance in model performance and ensures that the re­
ported results are robust to data perturbations.
