2.5. Feature ranking score
We developed an ensemble framework using ranking score tailored 
for AutoML tasks. This framework combines tree-based feature impor­
tance, permutation feature importance, and shapley additive explana­
tions (SHAP) values (Schreck et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 
2023), and produces an ensemble score with feature importance 
ranking. This approach provides a more balanced assessment by 
combining multiple perspectives, rather than relying on a single 
method.
In tree-based models, feature importance is derived directly from the 
structure of the models. For example, in RF, importance is calculated 
using the Gini importance, which measures the normalized reduction in 
the Gini criterion contributed by each feature. In this paper, this method 
is referred to as a tree-based method.
The permutation method calculates feature importance by evalu­
ating the change in model performance when the values of a feature are 
randomly shuffled (Breiman, 2001), which can be applied to any model 
using tabular data. Specifically, the importance of feature j is defined as 
ij = s −1
K
∑
K
k=1
sk,j,
(6) 
where ij represents the importance of feature j, s represents the reference 
model score (RMSE), and sk,j represents the model score after shuffling 
feature j at kth repetition. K is the total number of repetitions (30).
In addition, we employed SHAP, a model-agnostic framework for 
explaining predictions based on Shapley values (Lundberg et al., 2018; 
Lundberg and Lee, 2017). The SHAP method calculates the contribution 
of each feature to the output of the model (SHAP value) as follows: 
ϕi(f, x) =
∑
S⊆Sall\{i}
|S|!(M −|S| −1)!
M!
[fx(S ∪{i}) −fx(S)],
(7) 
where ϕi(f, x) represents the SHAP value for feature i, f(S) represents the 
model output for a subset of features S (S ⊆(0, 1)M), and M represents 
the set of all M input variables. |S| is the number of nonzero entries in S, 
and the summation iterates over all possible feature subsets. The 
contribution of feature i is determined by comparing the model output 
with and without this feature, weighted by the subset size.
The feature importance metrics obtained from the aforementioned 
methods are difficult to compare because of their different underlying 
principles. To address this, we introduced a “ranking score” metric to 
standardize the comparison of feature importance across the methods 
(Zheng et al., 2023). Feature importance values obtained from each 
method were sorted in ascending order, and each feature received a 
ranking corresponding to its position in the order-list. Specifically, the 
least important feature has a lowest score (1), and the second least 
important is 2, with higher scores given to increasingly important fea­
tures. This process ensured that the ranking scores ranged from one 
(indicating the least important feature) to the total number of features 
(indicating the most important feature). By normalizing the feature 
importance values in this manner, the feature importance from the 
different methods was consistent, facilitating direct comparison.
