3.3. Impact of data volume on predictive performance
ML-based modeling is a data-driven approach whose performance 
primarily depends on the quality and quantity of data (Fan and Shi, 
2022; Liu et al., 2023). However, when applied to experimental datasets, 
ML has inherent challenges in terms of data availability and reliability. 
Fig. 3. Bland-Altman analysis of (a) AutoML, (b) FCN, (c) CNN, and (d) Dense. The difference of COD-re is calculated by ground truth substrates prediction. The 
values of the central line are the mean difference of COD-re. The three horizontal lines in each plot, from top to bottom, represent the upper limit of agreement (mean 
difference + 1.96 × standard deviation), the mean difference, and the lower limit of agreement (mean difference - 1.96 × standard deviation). The results were 
obtained using the same dataset from Li et al. (2022).
Fig. 4. Model performance with different input features. Baseline indicates using T-R, T-in, T-env, pH-in, COD-in, and flux as features. Error bar is the 95% con­
fidence intervals of the error metrics from 10-fold cross validation.
J. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Journal of Environmental Management 401 (2026) 128801 
6 


<!-- Page 7 -->
Laboratory experiments often yield small sample sizes because of con­
straints such as time, cost, and space availability. Moreover, the exper­
imental data are susceptible to various sources of error, including 
human and instrumental errors. These limitations increase the difficulty 
of applying ML-based modeling approaches effectively. Furthermore, 
the ability of a small, high-quality dataset to yield better inferences than 
a larger, low-quality one is often debatable (Faraway and Augustin, 
2018; Kokol et al., 2022). To explore this, we examined the impact of 
increasing the amount of experimental data on AnMBR modeling. We 
incorporated additional data and compared the results using the same 
testing sets to ensure uniform evaluation. The additional data originated 
from the same AnMBR reactors, but with a different operational time 
range. We utilized the original dataset (M1, 50–414 d) and the extended 
dataset (M2, 7–546 d) to establish three validation schemes based on 
10-fold cross-validation (Fig. 6). First, M1T1 represents the baseline 
performance using standard cross-validation on M1, in which T1 in­
dicates the testing data were split from M1. Second, for M2T1, the 
additional data was integrated into the training folds only, allowing the 
model to learn from a broader range (M2) while being tested on the T1. 
Finally, M2T2 involves standard cross-validation on the full M2 dataset, 
in which T2 was split from M2.
A comparison between the M1T1 and M2T1 groups indicated that 
adding more data decreased the R2 value and increased RMSE, MAE and 
MAPE (Fig. 6). A comparison between M1T1 and M2T2 also showed that 
adding more data increased the prediction error, with M2T2 showing 
worse modeling performance (Fig. 6). These findings suggest that the 
addition of more data is not necessarily beneficial for modeling. A likely 
explanation is that data collected under varying experimental conditions 
Fig. 5. Bland-Altman analysis of AutoML models. (a) Baseline, (b) add OD, (c) add OD, ORP, HRT, MLSS, and MLVSS, and (d) add all without OD in the feature. The 
difference of COD-re is calculated by ground truth minus prediction. The values of the central line are the mean difference of COD-re. The three horizontal lines in 
each plot, from top to bottom, represent the upper limit of agreement (mean difference + 1.96 × standard deviation), the mean difference, and the lower limit of 
agreement (mean difference - 1.96 × standard deviation).
Fig. 6. Impact of dataset size on model performance. M1: original dataset with 50–414 operation days. M2: extended dataset with 7–546 operation days. M1T1: the 
baseline performance using standard cross-validation on M1. M2T1: the additional data was integrated into the training folds only. M2T2: standard cross-validation 
on the full M2 dataset.
J. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Journal of Environmental Management 401 (2026) 128801 
7 


<!-- Page 8 -->
introduce variability, biases, and specific errors, which collectively 
degrade the model performance. Spearman's correlation analysis of M1 
and M2 further revealed that the features in M2 were less correlated 
with COD removal than those in M1 (Figure S3 and Figure S4). In other 
words, the relevance of data is important for modeling. The irrelevance 
of data may stem from distribution shift in influent/AnMBR states or 
unmeasured disturbances, which can introduce noise that outweighs the 
benefits of a larger sample size. Therefore, the degrading performance 
with larger datasets should be interpreted as a signal of including the 
irrelevant data. This result highlights the need for data curation that 
prioritize high-quality and context-specific data rather than broad but 
indiscriminate data aggregation.
These results highlight the importance of carefully considering the 
data sources, quality, and applicability when applying ML to small 
experimental datasets. Increasing the volume of data without account­
ing for heterogeneity or relevance to the modeling can lead to dimin­
ished model accuracy and robustness. Future studies should focus on 
methods to effectively integrate multi-source data while mitigating po­
tential biases, ensuring the reliability and precision of ML models for 
experimental applications.
