3.4. Ensemble feature-based importance analysis
Using the ranking score approach (Section 2.4) to evaluate feature 
importance, the results of the three methods indicated that COD-in was 
the most important feature of all models (Fig. 7). For the model without 
OD and trained without additional data, T-env appeared to be the sec­
ond most important feature (Fig. 7 (a)), whereas for the model without 
OD but trained with additional data, pH-in became the second most 
important feature (Fig. 7 (e)). When the OD was included, it became the 
second most important feature, highlighting its important role in the 
modeling process (Fig. 7(c–g)). Overall, the COD-in is reasonable for the 
most important feature for predicting the COD removal of AnMBR as it 
can be served as an important indicator of reactor loading. In contrast, 
other features, such as ambient temperature, influent temperature, and 
pH, exhibited lower importance in the model, suggesting that these 
environmental parameters have a limited impact on the AnMBR 
performance.
According to Fig. 7(b–d, f, h), significant differences exist in the 
feature importance rankings among the interpretation methods. For 
instance, the results of the model trained with additional data showed 
notable discrepancies for T-env, flux, and pH-in across the different 
interpretation methods. Because determining the optimal interpretation 
method is difficult, we recommend employing a ranking score that in­
tegrates the results of multiple methods to ensure robustness. In addi­
tion, we examined the changes in feature importance when additional 
data were included. The results indicated substantial shifts in feature 
importance rankings, deviating significantly from the results of model 
trained with additional data. The interpretation results of the model 
trained with the additional data (Fig. 7 (h)) were not identical to those of 
the original model (Fig. 7 (f)). The methods selected for interpretation 
were based on the structure and prediction of the models. Thus, the 
deviations between them can be attributed to the incorporation of 
additional data that may introduce noise into the model, potentially 
reducing the predictive performance. This result supports the findings in 
Section 3.3 indicating that the additional data used in this study did not 
contribute to developing a robust AnMBR ML model.
The variability of feature importance reflects the uncertainty asso­
ciated with different mathematical methods for calculating the feature 
importance. However, despite these fluctuations, the top-tier features 
(COD-in and/or OD) consistently ranked highest across methods and 
models. This consistently suggests that while the lower-ranked variables 
carry uncertainty, the identification of the primary features is robust. 
The dominance of COD-in highlights the sensitivity to COD loadings, 
suggesting that COD-in can be a warning signal for COD-re prediction. 
For instance, when a high COD load is detected, the system can auto­
matically reduce the inflow rate to give the biological process more time 
to treat the water. The importance of OD underscores the non-stationary 
nature of the AnMBR process (e.g., membrane fouling and biomass 
maturation). This implies that process monitoring should not rely solely 
on instantaneous sensor readings but must also incorporate time- 
dependent maintenance schedules.
