3.1. AutoML for efficient AnMBR modeling
We constructed the AutoML model on the same dataset (including 
features and targets) as Li et al. (2022) and benchmarked its perfor­
mance against their results. The results showed that AutoML achieves 
competitive performance compared to the reported results of previous 
deep learning models (FCN, CNN, and DenseNet) (Table 1 and Fig. 2). 
The negative R2 values observed for previously deep learning architec­
tures may originate from overfitting, limited dataset size, lack of rele­
vant features, and model suitability for the task (Jiang et al., 2025). By 
using AutoML, the R2 value increased from negative to positive, high­
lighting a marked improvement in model performance. Further, we 
evaluated the AutoML using 10-fold cross-validation. The narrow RMSE 
confidence interval (±0.33%) validates the robustness of AutoML. 
Notably, tree-based models were used as base learners for the AutoML 
tasks. These models exhibit notable differences from neural networks, 
particularly in handling tabular data (Grinsztajn et al., 2022; 
Shwartz-Ziv and Armon, 2022). Existing evidence also suggests that 
tree-based algorithms often outperform deep learning methods when 
applied to structured tabular data and do not require extensive data 
preprocessing (McElfresh et al., 2023). Consequently, the adoption of 
J. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Journal of Environmental Management 401 (2026) 128801 
4 


<!-- Page 5 -->
tree-based AutoML not only enhances the model accuracy but also im­
proves the efficiency of the AnMBR modeling workflow.
Furthermore, Bland-Altman analysis was employed to evaluate the 
consistency between predictions and observations (the ground truth), 
providing insights into the predictive accuracy and stability of the 
models. It shows the average difference (bias) and calculates the limits 
of agreement, which capture the expected range for most differences. A 
wider limit of agreement boundary indicates poorer consistency be­
tween the model and the observations. The AutoML results were 
distributed in a lower limit of agreement range than those of the deep 
learning models, with a more uniform error distribution (Fig. 3). This 
suggests that the AutoML approach yields more consistent and stable 
predictions. In our analysis, the majority of data points were within the 
95% confidence interval, demonstrating a strong agreement between 
the observed values and model predictions.
For the deep learning models, a trend was observed in which the 
difference between the predicted and observed values decreased as the 
mean value increased. By contrast, the AutoML results displayed no 
discernible pattern, with differences evenly distributed across the range 
of mean values, highlighting the stability and robustness of AutoML. It is 
noteworthy that all the analysis results show a positive mean difference 
(Fig. 3). This indicates a systematic tendency to underestimate the COD 
removal rate using these models. This underestimation may be attrib­
uted to the imbalanced data distribution between the training and 
testing sets. Additionally, data-driven models tend to smooth out the 
noise introduced by measurement uncertainty and the dynamic nature 
of the biological process. Despite this, the AutoML achieved an RMSE of 
3.09(%), which is lower than the standard deviation of the experimental 
COD removal efficiency reported in long-term AnMBR operations 
(Robles et al., 2022; Uman et al., 2021). This result indicates that the 
model's overall accuracy is sufficient to describe the AnMBR dynamics. 
However, as we discussed, overfitting, limited dataset size, model suit­
ability for the task, and testing methods affect the performance, thus the 
comparison results are indicative rather than definitive.
