3.5. Limitations and future perspectives
While this study indicates AutoML as a potential tool for AnMBR 
modeling with limited data, several limitations warrant attention. First, 
although AutoML outperformed previous models under the identical 
fixed data split strategy, these results should be interpreted as indicative 
within this specific experimental setup rather than definitively superior 
across all models and scenarios. Second, the observation that certain 
features (e.g., MLSS and MLVSS) contributed less to the model should 
not be interpreted as the physical or biological aspect, but reflects 
modeling results. Thus, these findings represent statistical feature 
importance, not mechanistic causality. Third, the performance failed to 
improve with a larger dataset does not imply data volume being useless. 
Instead, it underscores the critical importance of data consistency and 
quality over mere quantity, highlighting the impact of distribution shifts 
in dynamic processes of AnMBR treating wastewater. Finally, this study 
provides deterministic point estimates. To further enhance operational 
decision-making, future works could integrate probabilistic approaches. 
Such approaches can provide prediction intervals and quantify 
Fig. 7. Ranking score of models. (a) model trained with original data, (c) model 
trained with original data and additional data, (e) same as (a) with OD added in 
the feature, and (g) same as (c) with OD in the feature. (b), (d), (f), and (h) are 
the components of the ranking score of (a), (c), (e), and (g), respectively.
J. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Journal of Environmental Management 401 (2026) 128801 
8 


<!-- Page 9 -->
uncertainty, offering more comprehensive information for biological 
wastewater treatment modeling.
