2. Material and methods
2.1. Experiment method
Synthetic greywater was prepared following Ongena et al. (2023) using Korean commercial personal care products, detergents, and 
Fig. 2. Flowchart of data-driven model development and evaluation for nitrification process monitoring.
S. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Environmental Technology & Innovation 40 (2025) 104541 
3 


<!-- Page 4 -->
literature-derived compositions. The overall synthetic greywater contained 405 ± 70 mg L−1 of chemical oxygen demand (COD), 
20 ± 3 mg L−1 of NH+
4 −N and 21 ± 5 mg L−1 of total nitrogen (TN). The remainder of the COD and TN not provided by the personal 
care products and detergents was approximated by adding acetate and ammonium chloride. Fresh batches were prepared daily with 
tap water.
Two parallel 10 L MBRs were inoculated with activated sludge sampled from an Anaerobic-Anoxic-Oxic wastewater treatment 
plant (Incheon, Korea) and operated for 235 days. Each contained two 0.56-μm SiC flat-sheet membranes (0.165 m² surface area; 
Fig. 1). Continuous aeration maintained DO at 5.1 ± 2.2 mg L⁻¹ . Greywater feeding and permeate extraction were conducted 
continuously, with timer-controlled relaxation (0.06 L min⁻¹). The operational strategy for the two parallel MBRs involved three 
phases of adjusted net flux and aeration to enhance greywater treatment, particularly ammonia removal (Fig. 1). Initially low ammonia 
removal under a flux of 2.9 L/(m²⋅h) and aeration of 2.0 L/min prompted an increase in aeration to 6.0 L/min in Phase 2 to improve 
nitrification efficiency. Phase 3 involved an increase in flux to 6.9 L/(m²⋅h) to further test hydraulic stability. Biocarriers (10 % 
packing ratio) were added to MBR-2 in phase 3 to try to reduce membrane fouling under high flux and promote anoxic zones for 
enhancing simultaneous nitrification-denitrification, enabling comparative performance evaluation with MBR-1. The 10 % packing 
ratio was selected to balance fouling control with operational safety, avoiding abrasion and energy issues associated with higher loads 
(Noor et al., 2023; Rahman et al., 2023). These intentional variations in flux, aeration, and biocarriers addition diversified operational 
conditions, enriching the dataset to enhance the machine learning model’s generalizability across multiple scenarios.
Influent, effluent and reactor water quality were analyzed daily as described in supplementary information (SI) 1.
2.2. Data-driven modelling
Fig. 2 presents the comprehensive flow-chart adopted for developing data-driven models to monitor the nitrification process in the 
MBR. Additionally, result analysis and future perspectives are elaborated in Sections 3 and 4.
2.2.1. Binary classification: nitrification process evaluation
To effectively predict nitrification status, the relationship between the concentrations of NO₃⁻-N, NO₂⁻-N, and NH₄⁺-N in the reactor 
must be understood. In the simultaneous nitrification and denitrification process within the MBR, the concentration of NO3
- -N typically 
exceeds that of NO2
- -N and NH4
+-N under sufficient aeration, which is a key factor for effective nitrogen conversion and removal (Huang 
et al., 2022; Paetkau and Cicek, 2011). Therefore, sufficient nitrification was defined as the condition in which the concentration of 
NO3
- -N exceeds the combined concentrations of NO2
- -N and NH4
+-N, labeled as “Positive”; otherwise, the condition was labeled as 
“Negative”. The primary goal of the data-driven model for treatment process prediction was to classify whether nitrification was 
sufficient or insufficient.
2.2.2. Qualitative analysis of inputs selection
Three data categories were collected during the experiment: 1 > Hydraulic: hydraulic retention time (HRT) and sludge retention 
time (SRT); 2 > Operational: transmembrane pressure (TMP), air/influent/effluent flow rates, gross/net flux, flux recovery; 3 > Water 
quality: COD, TN, NH₄⁺-N, NO₃⁻-N, NO₂⁻-N (in influent, effluent, and mixed liquor in the reactor), TSS (influent/effluent), and DO, 
MLSS, MLVSS in the reactor. Removal efficiency was also calculated for each parameter. Input features were selected from the 
perspective of practical deployment, including: 1> Direct measurability, 2> Commercial sensor compatibility, 3> Operational rele­
vance (e.g., TMP).
Indirect variables (SRT, removal efficiencies) were excluded. Water quality parameters (DO, COD, TN, NH₄⁺-N, NO₃⁻-N, NO₂⁻-N) 
and operational factors (flow rates, air flow, TMP) were initially considered. However, > 50 % DO data absence led to its exclu­
sion—simulating probe failure scenarios. Air flow rate was retained as an oxygen proxy. Online sensor compatibility was prioritized to 
enhance model applicability and robustness. Influent water quality was excluded due to sensor reliability concerns: complex matrices 
cause fouling on sensors and sensor degradation (e.g., Ag/AgCl electrodes dissolution) (Ching et al., 2022; Haimi et al., 2013). Effluent 
NO₂⁻-N was also excluded due to measurement instability versus stable NO₃⁻-N. TMP was included to monitor membrane performance, 
contributing to long-term operation monitoring. Finally, the dataset was refined by removing inappropriate variables and simplifying 
the inputs to facilitate dataset splitting.
2.2.3. Data preprocessing
From 128 datasets collected over 235 days from dual MBRs, eight incomplete entries were excluded. Biocarriers were added to one 
reactor in Phase 3 to enable denitrification (Fig. 1), altering parameter relationships. To evaluate cross-scenario applicability, 23 data 
groups from Phase 3 were used as an independent test group for models trained exclusively on 97 no-biocarrier data groups (activated 
sludge only). The 97 data groups were utilized for training, validation, and testing of the model’s performance in predicting nitrifi­
cation with activated sludge only. This approach assessed performance under altered operational conditions. Given inherent influent 
variability in onsite greywater systems, outliers were intentionally retained to evaluate model robustness against operational fluc­
tuations, reflecting real-world dynamics.
2.2.4. Dataset splitting strategy
The preprocessed dataset comprised 120 groups of data, daily measurements reflecting operational manipulations. The data 
exhibited an inherent imbalance in label distribution due to controlled changes in treatment conditions. For each reactor, the airflow 
S. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Environmental Technology & Innovation 40 (2025) 104541 
4 


<!-- Page 5 -->
rate was maintained at 2.0 L/min until day 111 and increased to 6.0 L/min thereafter to enhance the nitrification treatment. Similarly, 
the influent flow rate was predominantly 11.7 ML/min before the 149th day and increased to 20.6 ML/min afterward. Given these 
temporal shifts, a simple chronological split of the data could not fairly evaluate model performance. To ensure a representative 
assessment, the training and test sets were constructed strategically to encompass these operational variations, as illustrated in Fig. 3.
Given the imbalanced air flow and influent flow rates, every fourth data point was selected to form the test set, constituting 20 % of 
the data (8 positive & 11 negative labels). The remaining 80 % (28 positive & 50 negative labels) were used for training and validation, 
maintaining distinct distributional characteristics to assess model generalization. Hyperparameter optimization employed stratified 5- 
fold cross-validation (Scikit-Learn’s StratifiedKFold), ensuring balanced class representation in each fold for enhanced reliability with 
imbalanced dataset (Szeghalmy and Fazekas, 2023; Zeng and Martinez, 2000). Additionally, 23 datasets from the biocarrier-added 
condition (Section 2.2 ; 15 positive and 8 negative labels) were used to test cross-scenario robustness under divergent label distri­
butions. Section 2.1
