2.2.5. Statistical correlation analysis for inputs determination
Based on the preliminary input feature selections by qualitative analysis in Section 2.2.2, Spearman’s rank correlation was used to 
assess statistical relationships between inputs and outputs. This nonparametric method quantifies the strength of monotonic associ­
ations between variables without assuming normal distribution, making it suitable for nonlinear yet monotonic classification contexts 
(Hastie et al., 2009). Statistical significance was determined using p-values. Specifically, the p-value indicates the probability of 
obtaining the observed Spearman correlation coefficient, or a more extreme value, under the null hypothesis that no monotonic 
relationship exists between the variables. A p-value < 0.05 was used to reject the null hypothesis and confirm a significant correlation. 
The "spearmanr" function (SciPy, Python) computed coefficients and p-values for all variable pairs. (Van Rossum and Drake, 2009).
2.2.6. Model-based interpretability: interpretable ML algorithms
To predict the nitrification status in the MBR and ensure stable operations, this study considered not only the statistical accuracy of 
ML methods but also integrated algorithm-specific characteristics. In ML, bias stems from simplifying assumptions, while variance 
reflects sensitivity to fluctuations in the training data (Reynaert et al., 2023). Minimizing one typically increases the other (Belkin 
et al., 2019).
Fig. 3. Splitting strategy for training, validation and test groups.
S. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Environmental Technology & Innovation 40 (2025) 104541 
5 


<!-- Page 6 -->
Previous studies have indicated that simpler models generally offer advantages for small datasets, including reduced overfitting 
risk, improved interpretability, and lower computational demands (Reynaert et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2025). For small, non-temporal 
datasets, complex structures such as artificial neural networks can increase the risk of overfitting (Chiroma et al., 2019).
Therefore, three interpretable algorithms with distinct bias–variance properties were selected. The logistic regression and decision 
tree-based models are normally cited as simulatable, i.e., interpretable (Breiman et al., 2017; Murdoch et al., 2019). 
– Logistic regression (LR): High bias, low variance. Applies logit transformation to linear regression for binary probability pre­
diction, handling continuous/categorical variables with high interpretability and simple structure (Hosmer et al., 2013).
– Random forest classification (RF): Intermediate bias-variance tradeoff. An ensemble method aggregating multiple decision trees 
via voting, improving accuracy and noise resistance for high-dimensional data (Breiman, 2001).
– Extreme gradient boosting classification (XGB): Low bias, high variance. An optimized implementation of the gradient boosting 
algorithm with successive decision trees, each correcting the errors of its predecessor to minimize the loss function and improve 
predictive performance. Compared to traditional gradient boosting decision trees, XGB introduces enhancements such as regula­
rization, parallel computing, and custom loss function definition (Chen and Guestrin, 2016).
All models were implemented using scikit-learn 1.0.2 (Python 3.9.13), with hyperparameters optimized via grid search.
2.2.7. Evaluation metrics and hyperparameter tuning criteria
The performance of the classification models was evaluated using a confusion matrix, contrasting predicted outcomes ("Sufficient"/ 
"Insufficient") against actual conditions. The “Positive” label indicated sufficient nitrification, while the “Negative” label indicated 
insufficient nitrification, as defined in Section 2.1 Key metrics included true positives (TP: correctly classified sufficient nitrification), 
false positives (FP: erroneously classified sufficient under insufficient conditions), false negatives (FN: insufficient misclassifications 
despite actual sufficiency), and true negatives (TN: accurate classified as insufficient). Section 2.2.1
Minimizing the FPR was crucial for ensuring safe effluent water quality. For instance, in a control system integrated with this 
nitrification monitoring model, when insufficient nitrification occurs, more air should be supplied. However, if an FP occurs, the model 
incorrectly predicts sufficient nitrification, leading the control system to refrain from adding additional oxygen and unsafe effluent 
unsuitable for reuse. Meanwhile, a higher TPR was necessary to detect sufficient nitrification under conventional operation conditions, 
reducing operational costs by preventing unnecessary oxygen supply triggered by FN.
Besides, optimizing solely for low FPR could severely reduce TPR, as indicated in previous studies (Reynaert et al., 2023; Salvia 
et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2019). Therefore, a balanced approach considering both TPR (Eq. 1) and FPR (Eq. 2) was adopted, with 
precision (Eq. 3) serving as a key optimization metric. Precision reflects the proportion of TP predictions among all positive predictions 
The TRP, FPR, and precision were calculated using the following equations: 
TPR =
TP
TP + FN
(1) 
FPR =
FP
FP + TN
(2) 
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(3) 
Although precision was prioritized during hyperparameter tuning, accuracy, representing the proportion of correct predictions out 
of all cases, was also used for model evaluation in test groups: 
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(4) 
Finally, the stability of model performance was evaluated on the test dataset by calculating 95 % confidence intervals for accuracy, 
precision, recall, and F1 score using 1000-times bootstrap resampling, following standard practices in machine learning validation.
2.2.8. Post hoc interpretability
Despite the inherent interpretability of decision tree-based methods, complex models necessitate post hoc interpretation (Murdoch 
et al., 2019).
Feature importance quantifies the contributions of input variables, aiding model’s interpretability improvement and guiding data 
collection strategies for enhanced performance. In LR, feature coefficients are derived by minimizing the loss function (negative log- 
likelihood) using optimization methods such as gradient descent (Hastie et al., 2009). They indicate the strength and direction of each 
feature’s linear relationship with the target variable (Murphy, 2012). For RF, feature importance is assessed by the reduction in 
impurity (e.g., Gini index) when a feature is used to split a node. Scores are averaged across all trees, capturing the overall contribution 
of each feature to the model (Liaw and Wiener, 2002). The feature importance in XGB is typically calculated using the Gain method. 
This method sums up and normalizes the gains from all splits involving a feature to compute its importance score (Chen and Guestrin, 
2016).
SHAP analysis was implemented to leverage game theory to assign each feature an importance value for specific predictions. SHAP 
S. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Environmental Technology & Innovation 40 (2025) 104541 
6 


<!-- Page 7 -->
values satisfy efficiency (prediction = base value + sum of feature contributions), symmetry, and additivity axioms, providing 
consistent local and global interpretability (Lundberg and Lee, 2017).
Furthermore, pairwise feature relationships were visualized via kernel density estimation (KDE) and pairwise feature plot. KDE 
could nonparametrically approximate continuous probability density functions by smoothing observed data points via symmetric 
kernel functions and bandwidth parameters (Scott, 2015). Pairwise feature plots, implemented as scatterplot matrices, reveal corre­
lation and clustering patterns between features (Pekalska et al., 2005). It can help understand model classification performance by 
visualizing the confusion matrix (Waskom, 2021).
All analyses were implemented in Python 3.9.13 (Van Rossum and Drake, 2009).
