2.1. Study area and water quality dataset

Datasets of surface water quality were collected from the CNEMC, 
covering nine major river basins, including Continental, Hai, Huai, 
Pearl, Song-Liao, Southeast, Southwest, Yangtze, and Yellow rivers. The 
data were collected from approximately 1900 monitoring sites from 
January 2021 to June 2024, with a time step of 4 h (Fig. 1a). The na­
tional online monitoring system of CNEMC focuses on a core set of 11 
feasible indicators for real-time tracking. However, after assessing data 
quality, two of these indicators [chlorophyll-a (Chl-a, mg/L) and algal 
density (cells/L)] were excluded from our study due to severe data 
missingness (>70 %, Table S3). The final analysis was therefore con­
ducted on the remaining nine robustly-monitored indicators: water 
temperature (WT, ◦C), pH, dissolved oxygen (DO, mg/L), electrical 
conductivity (EC, μS/cm), chemical oxygen demand (CODMn, mg/L), 
ammonia nitrogen (NH3-N, mg/L), total phosphorus (TP, mg/L), total 
nitrogen (TN, mg/L), and turbidity (NTU).
According to the Environmental Quality Standards for Surface Water 
(MEEPRC, 2002), water quality was classified into six classes from best 
to worst (I-WV). This classification serves as the target variable for our 
supervised learning models. The classification for each data record was 
pre-determined by the CNEMC based on the “single-factor evaluation 
method”, where the final class is assigned based on the poorest- 
performing individual indicator relative to the standard limits as 
shown in Table S1. Our objective is therefore to predict this official 
classification using the nine selected water quality indicators as input 
features.
To ensure computational feasibility for the extensive automated 
model search and subsequent SHAP analysis, a subset of 50,000 samples 
was extracted from the cleaned dataset (n = 10,159,876) using stratified 
random sampling. This sampling approach was chosen to prioritize 
model stability, as our analysis showed that training on the full dataset 
produced unstable, high-variance results and required computationally 
prohibitive runtimes (Fig. S1). To rigorously evaluate the stability and 
robustness of our findings against sampling variability, this entire 
sampling process was repeated five times using different random seeds 
(42, 123, 777, 1024, and 2048).
This sampling methodology not only preserved the proportional 
distribution of the water quality classes (Fig. 1b) but also maintained a 
broadly consistent distribution across the major river basins. As detailed 
in Table S2, the proportional representation of each basin in the sampled 
subsets shows strong alignment with the full dataset, exhibiting only 
minor deviations, thereby confirming that the sampling process did not 
introduce significant regional bias. For the regional analysis, the same 
stratified sampling approach was applied to each major basin separately. 
Spearman correlation analysis was performed on the stratified dataset, 
and indicated no significant relationships among the selected water 
quality indicators (Fig. 1c), thus eliminating the need for removal of 
multicollinearity features.
2.2. Model development and validation strategies

For model inputs, all nine water quality indicators (WT, pH, DO, EC, 
CODMn, NH3-N, TP, TN, and NTU) were used as input features, with 
water quality classes (I-WV) as the output target. To rigorously evaluate 
model performance and stability, three distinct validation schemes were 
W. Qin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Journal of Hydrology 665 (2026) 134634 
2 


<!-- Page 3 -->
employed. 
i. Stratified random split: This was the baseline validation method. 
For each of the five runs, the 50,000-sample subset was randomly 
partitioned into a training set (80 %, n = 40,000) and a test set 
(20 %, n = 10,000) while maintaining class proportions.
ii. Temporal hold-out validation: To assess the models’ ability to 
perform on future, unseen data, the entire clean dataset (n =
10,159,876) was divided based on a timestamp of “2024–01-01 
Fig. 1. Study area and dataset: (a) distribution of water quality monitoring sites in the study area; (b) distribution of water quality classes before and after stratified 
sampling, a process repeated five times with unique random seeds; (c) Spearman correlation heatmap of water quality indicators.
Fig. 2. Comparison of ML pipelines: (a) traditional ML pipeline requiring manual intervention at multiple stages; (b) AutoML pipeline utilizing Auto-sklearn 
framework, which automates the model development process through meta-learning, Bayesian optimization, and ensemble construction.
W. Qin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Journal of Hydrology 665 (2026) 134634 
3 


<!-- Page 4 -->
00:00:00”. The training set (n = 40,000) was then sampled 
exclusively from data recorded before this timestamp, while the 
test set (n = 10,000) was sampled from data recorded after this 
point. This process was also repeated five times using different 
random seeds.
iii. Spatial hold-out validation: Finally, to evaluate geographic 
generalizability, a leave-one-basin-out validation was conducted. 
This process consisted of nine iterations where each major river 
basin was sequentially designated as the hold-out basin. For each 
iteration, a training set (n = 40,000) was sampled from the 
remaining eight basins, and a test set (n = 10,000) was sampled 
from the single hold-out basin.
Consequently, all quantitative performance metrics reported in this 
study are presented as the mean ± Standard Deviation (SD) across the 
respective runs or hold-out basins to ensure the robustness of our 
conclusions.
2.3. Traditional and automated machine learning

Traditional ML pipelines require substantial human intervention 
across multiple stages, including data preprocessing, feature engineer­
ing, model selection, and hyperparameter tuning (Fig. 2a). For tradi­
tional ML models, each input feature was standardized using Z-score 
normalization (μ = 0, σ = 1) to ensure all variables had comparable 
scales, as illustrated in Fig. S2. And Gaussian process-based Bayesian 
optimization was employed for hyperparameter tuning in traditional ML 
approaches (Snoek et al., 2012).
In contrast, for AutoML implementation, raw data was used without 
any preprocessing, allowing the algorithm to automatically determine 
the optimal preprocessing methods (Fig. 2b). The Auto-sklearn (version 
0.15.0) framework combines Bayesian optimization, meta-learning, and 
ensemble construction for AutoML pipeline selection (Feurer et al., 
2015). This framework incorporates comprehensive ML tools, including 
classification algorithms, feature preprocessing methods, and data pre­
processing techniques. No manual adjustments were made to the model 
selection process, with Auto-sklearn automatically defining the search 
space for hyperparameter optimization. For the accurate assessment of 
model performance, due to the highly imbalanced distribution of water 
quality classes in the dataset, both traditional ML and AutoML utilized 5- 
fold stratified cross-validation during model training (Fig. S3).
For comprehensive evaluation, Auto-sklearn was compared with 
both conventional ML models implemented through scikit-learn [Lo­
gistic Regression (LR), k-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Decision Tree (DT), 
Random Forest (RF)] and state-of-the-art ensemble learning models 
[CatBoost (CatB), LightGBM (LGBM), XGBoost (XGB)]. All imple­
mentations were conducted using Python 3.8.13. Detailed information 
about traditional ML methods is provided in the Supplementary Mate­
rials (Text S1).
2.4. Model evaluation metrics

The predictive performance of the models was assessed through a 
comprehensive suite of multi-dimensional evaluation metrics. These 
metrics, including their mathematical formulas and detailed statistical 
interpretations, are summarized in Table S4. For this multi-class clas­
sification task, we employed key metrics such as Precision, Recall, and 
the Weighted F1, which effectively accounts for class imbalance. Addi­
tionally, confusion matrices were used for a visual breakdown of clas­
sification performance across all classes, while Receiver Operating 
Characteristic (ROC) curves and the corresponding Area Under the 
Curve (AUC) values were used to evaluate the overall discriminative 
ability of the models.
2.5. Explanation of Auto-sklearn

To interpret the ensemble model generated by Auto-sklearn, we 
employed the SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) method, which 
calculates feature importance through game theory principles (Kuhn, 
2020). In ML context, Shapley values measure the individual impact of 
each feature in the model, collectively contributing to the prediction. 
Various versions of SHAP have been developed by Lundberg and Lee, 
including DeepSHAP, Kernel SHAP, LinearSHAP, and TreeSHAP, each 
designed to approximate SHAP values for different types of ML models. 
A critical prerequisite for a meaningful SHAP analysis is the high pre­
dictive accuracy of the model being explained. The SHAP interpretation 
was therefore performed only after the high predictive performance of 
the Auto-sklearn ensemble had been established.
Auto-sklearn can produce heterogeneous ensembles of different al­
gorithm types. Therefore, the model-agnostic Kernel SHAP was selected 
for interpretation, as it is well-suited for such ensembles and requires no 
model-specific adjustments. It approximates SHAP values through a 
weighted local regression that bridges Model-agnostic Explanations 
(LIME) methods with Shapley values from cooperative game theory 
(Lundberg and Lee, 2017b). The SHAP value ∅i for feature i is calculated 
as follows: 
ϕi =
∑
S⊆F{i}
|S|!(M −|S|! −1 )!
M!
[fx(S ∪{i} ) −fx(S) ]
(1) 
where fx (S) is defined as: 
fx(S) = E[f(x)|xs ]
(2) 
where S represents the subset of features excluding feature i, F is the set 
of all features, M is the total number of features, and fx (S) represents the 
expected model prediction when only features in subset S are known. 
Kernel SHAP approximates these values by sampling feature coalitions 
and computing model predictions, making it particularly suitable for 
ensemble models where direct interpretation of model internals is 
challenging (Moradi and Samwald, 2021).
3. Results
