In this study, Auto-sklearn demonstrated leading performance in 
water quality classification compared to traditional ML models, 
achieving the highest scores across multiple evaluation metrics 
(Table 1). Through automated model selection and optimization, Auto- 
Fig. 7. Screening of key water quality indicators. (a) Overall indicator importance ranking showing the five-run mean of normalized SHAP values (where values 
within each run were normalized to sum to one). (b) Model performance evolution (Weighted F1, red line) and the incremental F1 increase (blue bars) as top-ranked 
indicators are sequentially added to the model. Different letters denote statistically significant differences (Tukey’s HSD, p < 0.05). (For interpretation of the ref­
erences to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 8. Regional variations in key water quality indicators across major basins in China. The bubble size represents the relative importance of each indicator for 
water quality classification in different basins, quantified as the mean normalized SHAP value calculated from five independent runs.
W. Qin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Journal of Hydrology 665 (2026) 134634 
8 


<!-- Page 9 -->
sklearn successfully identified and combined complementary models 
into an ensemble of 7 ML pipelines (Table 1), automating the multi-stage 
manual workflow required by traditional ML approaches into an inte­
grated process (Fig. 2). While we compared Auto-sklearn with various 
ML models both inside and outside the framework to validate its per­
formance, it is important to note that conventional ML models theo­
retically cannot outperform AutoML since they are part of the model 
selection library of Auto-sklearn. This aligns with previous findings 
where even experienced data scientists could not surpass automated 
optimization of Auto-sklearn in specially designed challenge competi­
tions (Guyon et al., 2019).
The performance improvement of Auto-sklearn over RF was rela­
tively modest (Table 1), as RF was automatically selected as the optimal 
classifier across all seven ensemble pipelines (Table 1), which aligns 
with findings from previous studies in clinical diagnostic applications 
(Bifarin and Fern´andez, 2024). The consistent selection of RF validates 
the automated model search effectiveness of Auto-sklearn and indicates 
tree-based ensemble methods with moderate complexity work particu­
larly well for classification tasks (Chan et al., 2023; Senocak et al., 
2023).
All in all, AutoML frameworks such as Auto-sklearn are suggested to 
be employed directly for ML tasks in environmental monitoring instead 
of conducting extensive model screening and hyperparameter tuning. 
This approach not only ensures optimal model selection through auto­
mated processes but also saves considerable time typically spent on 
comparing various standalone algorithms. Although AutoML may 
require substantial computational resources, with the rapid advance­
ment of computing infrastructure and increasing accessibility to high- 
performance computing resources, computational demands are 
becoming less of a constraint. The successful application in water quality 
classification demonstrated here provides a representative case for 
broader adoption of AutoML in environmental science research.
4.2. Rationality and practicality of key water quality indicators screening
