2.2.6. Model-based interpretability: interpretable ML algorithms
To predict the nitrification status in the MBR and ensure stable operations, this study considered not only the statistical accuracy of 
ML methods but also integrated algorithm-specific characteristics. In ML, bias stems from simplifying assumptions, while variance 
reflects sensitivity to fluctuations in the training data (Reynaert et al., 2023). Minimizing one typically increases the other (Belkin 
et al., 2019).
Fig. 3. Splitting strategy for training, validation and test groups.
S. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Environmental Technology & Innovation 40 (2025) 104541 
5 


<!-- Page 6 -->
Previous studies have indicated that simpler models generally offer advantages for small datasets, including reduced overfitting 
risk, improved interpretability, and lower computational demands (Reynaert et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2025). For small, non-temporal 
datasets, complex structures such as artificial neural networks can increase the risk of overfitting (Chiroma et al., 2019).
Therefore, three interpretable algorithms with distinct bias–variance properties were selected. The logistic regression and decision 
tree-based models are normally cited as simulatable, i.e., interpretable (Breiman et al., 2017; Murdoch et al., 2019). 
– Logistic regression (LR): High bias, low variance. Applies logit transformation to linear regression for binary probability pre­
diction, handling continuous/categorical variables with high interpretability and simple structure (Hosmer et al., 2013).
– Random forest classification (RF): Intermediate bias-variance tradeoff. An ensemble method aggregating multiple decision trees 
via voting, improving accuracy and noise resistance for high-dimensional data (Breiman, 2001).
– Extreme gradient boosting classification (XGB): Low bias, high variance. An optimized implementation of the gradient boosting 
algorithm with successive decision trees, each correcting the errors of its predecessor to minimize the loss function and improve 
predictive performance. Compared to traditional gradient boosting decision trees, XGB introduces enhancements such as regula­
rization, parallel computing, and custom loss function definition (Chen and Guestrin, 2016).
All models were implemented using scikit-learn 1.0.2 (Python 3.9.13), with hyperparameters optimized via grid search.
