2.2.8. Post hoc interpretability
Despite the inherent interpretability of decision tree-based methods, complex models necessitate post hoc interpretation (Murdoch 
et al., 2019).
Feature importance quantifies the contributions of input variables, aiding model’s interpretability improvement and guiding data 
collection strategies for enhanced performance. In LR, feature coefficients are derived by minimizing the loss function (negative log- 
likelihood) using optimization methods such as gradient descent (Hastie et al., 2009). They indicate the strength and direction of each 
feature’s linear relationship with the target variable (Murphy, 2012). For RF, feature importance is assessed by the reduction in 
impurity (e.g., Gini index) when a feature is used to split a node. Scores are averaged across all trees, capturing the overall contribution 
of each feature to the model (Liaw and Wiener, 2002). The feature importance in XGB is typically calculated using the Gain method. 
This method sums up and normalizes the gains from all splits involving a feature to compute its importance score (Chen and Guestrin, 
2016).
SHAP analysis was implemented to leverage game theory to assign each feature an importance value for specific predictions. SHAP 
S. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Environmental Technology & Innovation 40 (2025) 104541 
6 


<!-- Page 7 -->
values satisfy efficiency (prediction = base value + sum of feature contributions), symmetry, and additivity axioms, providing 
consistent local and global interpretability (Lundberg and Lee, 2017).
Furthermore, pairwise feature relationships were visualized via kernel density estimation (KDE) and pairwise feature plot. KDE 
could nonparametrically approximate continuous probability density functions by smoothing observed data points via symmetric 
kernel functions and bandwidth parameters (Scott, 2015). Pairwise feature plots, implemented as scatterplot matrices, reveal corre­
lation and clustering patterns between features (Pekalska et al., 2005). It can help understand model classification performance by 
visualizing the confusion matrix (Waskom, 2021).
All analyses were implemented in Python 3.9.13 (Van Rossum and Drake, 2009).
