2. Materials and methods
2.1. Data acquisition and preprocessing
The data utilized in this study were sourced from a water treatment 
plant located in Tianjin, China. This plant receives water from two pri­
mary sources: the Luanhe River (for December, January and February 
annually), diverted from Hebei Province, and the Yangtze River (from 
March to November annually), originating from the Danjiangkou 
Reservoir in Hubei Province. The water treatment process involves pre- 
treatment, enhanced conventional treatment, and a combination of ul­
traviolet and chlorine disinfection. The daily treatment capacity of the 
water plant is 17.5 wt/d, and the hydraulic retention time is relatively 
stable at 25.56 min. The plant uses two types of coagulants: ferric 
chloride and PACl, which are dosed during the pretreatment and 
blending stages, respectively. Water quality parameters and coagulant 
dosing data were collected daily from October 2022 to May 2024, 
totaling 1339 data points. These data were randomly divided into a 
training set (1071 entries) and a test set (268 entries) in an 8: 2 ratio. The 
feature variables consist of inflow rate (WTR) and water quality in­
dicators such as temperature (T), pH, turbidity (NTU), and electrical 
conductivity (EC), and chemical oxygen demand determined by potas­
sium permanganate (CODMn) for both raw water (RW) and treated water 
(TW), with ammonia nitrogen (NH3−N) being considered only for raw 
water. Based on practical plant operations and professional evaluations, 
the dosing amounts of the two coagulants are comparable, with a 
maximum discrepancy not exceeding 5 mg/L. Therefore, PACl was used 
as the only target variable for accurate simulation of coagulant dosing in 
this study.
During data collection, the occurrence of detection errors and dosing 
system malfunctions resulted in the raw data set containing problems 
such as missing values and noise. Therefore, preprocessing is essential to 
improve data reliability, model performance, and decision quality [38]. 
In this study, the K-nearest neighbor (KNN, k = 4) estimation model was 
used to deal with missing data, which balances interpolation stability 
and global representativeness, and provides better data retention for 
non-randomly missing key parameters (e.g., water temperature, 
ammonia nitrogen). The interpolation effect in the range of k = 1–10 
was searched through the grid and the mean square error (MSE) was 
used as the evaluation criterion, and the results showed that the MSE 
was minimized on the test set at k = 4. In addition, noise and random 
errors were mitigated using a moving average filter with a window size 
of n = 5, determined based on an autocorrelation function (ACF) anal­
ysis, a value that effectively captures short-term fluctuations in water 
quality parameters while avoiding excessive smoothing that leads to 
peak attenuation [39].
To investigate the correlations between various features such as 
WTR, raw water quality indicators, treated water quality indicators, and 
coagulant dosage, we used the Spearman rank correlation coefficient 
(rs) method, which is known for its low sensitivity to nonlinear re­
lationships and outliers. By excluding features with low correlations, we 
reduced redundant features to reduce the input dimensionality of the 
model, thereby improving both the operational efficiency and general­
ization capabilities of the model. A flowchart illustrating the modeling 
methodology is shown in Fig. 1.
2.2. Automated machine learning
AutoML is a technique for automating the machine learning process 
through algorithms, including feature engineering, algorithm selection, 
and hyperparameter optimization [40]. Its primary goal is to reduce the 
need for human intervention while improving model performance. In 
this study, the Tree-based Pipeline Optimization Tool (TPOT), an 
AutoML tool based on genetic programming, is used to automate model 
construction. TPOT is an open source Python-based AutoML library 
(version 0.11.7) with underlying dependencies on Scikit-Learn (version 
1.0.2), DEAP (Distributed Evolutionary Algorithms Framework), and 
extensions such as XGBoost [27]. The model runs in a Python 3.8 
environment, and the full configuration code for TPOT is open source.
In this study, the TPOT framework is adopted to automate the design 
of machine learning pipelines, whose core mechanisms are: iterative 
optimization based on tree-structured coding of genetic programming, 
integration of Scikit-Learn multi-algorithms with predefined hyper- 
parameter space to balance the search efficiency; and screening of the 
Pareto-optimal pipeline by repeating the 10-fold cross-validation (run 
independently for 3 times) to ensure the model generalization perfor­
mance [41].
2.3. SHAP interpretability method
The SHAP methodology encompasses Kernel SHAP, Deep SHAP, and 
Tree SHAP [42]. This study used the Tree SHAP package in Python 3.9 to 
analyze the importance, dependencies, and interactions of features. The 
modules and functions used in Python are listed in Table 1. The average 
absolute SHAP values were used to evaluate the importance of different 
factors in determining the dosage amount. By summing the average 
absolute SHAP values for all relevant environmental parameters, their 
combined impact on dosing strategies was quantified. Dependency plots 
of SHAP values revealed interactions between features and their col­
lective contribution to the prediction of dosing strategies for the coag­
ulation process [43]. Two typical samples were selected to generate 
local interpretability plots, waterfall plots, and decision plots in order to 
L. Feng et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Journal of Water Process Engineering 75 (2025) 107925 
2 


<!-- Page 3 -->
illustrate feature importance and decision-making mechanisms within 
the samples.
2.4. Model evaluation
Root mean square error (RMSE), mean absolute error (MAE), and 
coefficient of determination (R2) were used as evaluation metrics to 
assess the reliability and accuracy of the predictive models [44]. RMSE 
assesses the degree of discrepancy between predicted and actual values 
within a sample set [45]. It has an increased sensitivity to outliers and 
acts as a metric of model accuracy by calculating the average size of 
prediction errors. MAE reflects the average discrepancy between pre­
dicted and actual values, with values closer to zero indicating superior 
model performance [10]. R2 quantifies the fit of model predictions to 
actual data, assessing the robustness and reliability of the model. A value 
of R2 approaching one indicates a higher correlation between the 
dependent and independent variables, which indicates a better model fit 
and consequently smaller prediction errors [46].
3. Results and discussion