3.1. Analysis of water quality data and feature selection
Fig. 2 illustrates the histogram distributions and statistical in­
dicators, including minimum (MIN), maximum (MAX), mean, standard 
deviation (SD), and coefficient of variation (CV) for each feature. CV 
serves as a metric to quantify the variability in datasets [47], with higher 
CV values indicating greater data variability. Notably, significant dif­
ferences are observed in T (SD = 9.37, CV = 62 %), NH3-N (SD = 0.07, 
CV = 59 %), NTU (SD = 2.58, CV = 57 %) for raw water, and T for 
treated water (SD = 8.77, CV = 54 %). Most other features remain 
relatively stable, with the pH fluctuation was minimal throughout the 
entire water treatment process, with a CV of only 3 % for the raw water 
pH and a CV of merely 2 % for the treated water pH.
The quality of raw water has a direct impact on the safety and reli­
ability of the final water supply, as well as coagulant requirements. Raw 
water quality indicators at this plant, such as CODMn and ammonia ni­
trogen, exhibit distinct seasonal trends. During summer, elevated tem­
peratures and increased rainfall stimulate algae growth in water sources, 
which raises the CODMn in water bodies and subsequently affects raw 
water quality. Additionally, rising temperatures reduce water viscosity, 
promoting ion movement in solutions and leading to decreased coagu­
lant requirements. In contrast, during winter, low temperatures decrease 
the solubility and diffusivity of coagulants, resulting in a deceleration of 
chemical reactions. Consequently, higher coagulant dosages become 
necessary to ensure the effectiveness of water treatment. Accurate 
calculation of coagulant dosage based on real-time raw water quality 
data and historical fluctuation information is crucial for maintaining 
process efficiency, stable water quality output, and prudent chemical 
use.
The Spearman rank correlation matrix in Fig. 3 illustrates the re­
lationships between the input parameters and the outcome variable. 
Strong correlations with PACl coagulant dosage are observed for T-RW 
Fig. 1. A flowchart illustrates the modeling methodology.
Table 1 
Python modules and their corresponding functions employed.
Module
Function
Sklearn 1.5.0
Data processing, data set division, model evaluation, cross 
validation
Scipy 1.13.1
Spearman analysis
Seaborn 0.13.2
Statistical data visualization
Tpot 0.12 2
TPOT Regressor model establishment
Shap 0.45.1
Model interpretation, data visualization
Matplotlib 
3.9.0
Graphical drawing
L. Feng et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Journal of Water Process Engineering 75 (2025) 107925 
3 


<!-- Page 4 -->
(rs = −0.71), NH3-N-RW (rs = 0.87), pH-RW (rs = −0.9), T-RW (rs =
−0.67), and WTR (rs = −0.68). Moderate correlations are found for 
NTU-RW (rs = 0.45), EC-RW (rs = 0.56), pH-RW (rs = −0.33), and 
CODMn-RW (rs = 0.56), as well as for EC-TW (rs = 0.43) and NTU-TW 
(rs = −0.23). CODMn-TW (rs = 0.011) shows a weak correlation with 
PACl dosage. Notably, EC-RW and EC-TW are highly linearly correlated 
(rs = 0.98), and CODMn-RW and EC-RW are also highly linearly corre­
lated with T-TW (rs = 0.91 and −0.95, respectively). Therefore, to avoid 
redundancy, only one feature from each highly correlated pair is 
retained, in addition to EC-RW and CODMn-RW. The final feature set for 
model training includes T-RW, pH-RW, NH3-N-RW, NTU-RW, EC-RW, 
CODMn-RW, pH-TW, NTU-TW, and WTR, with PACl dosage as the target 
variable. This model captures the complex interactions between raw 
water quality, dosage, and treated water quality.
Fig. 2. Histogram distributions of various features and target variables (RW: raw water, TW: treated water, MIN: minimum, MAX: maximum, SD: standard deviation, 
CV: coefficient of variation. Each subplot represents the distribution of sample points within a specific variable. The vertical axis reveals the occurrence frequency of 
each feature within the dataset, while the horizontal axis depicts the sample intervals. The purple line represents the fitted frequency distribution curve, which 
indicates the range of variable utilization within the dataset). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web 
version of this article.)
L. Feng et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Journal of Water Process Engineering 75 (2025) 107925 
4 


<!-- Page 5 -->