3.3. SHAP interpretation
Fig. 6 presents the SHAP feature importance and summary plots for 
the model evaluated on the testing set. Feature importance ranking from 
highest to lowest is as follows: EC-RW, pH-TW, NH3-N-RW, CODMn-RW, 
T-RW, NTU-RW, WTR, NTU-TW, and pH-RW, as shown in Fig. 6(a). 
Notably, the model in this study was constructed using monitoring data 
from the water treatment plant, adhering to the principle of continu­
ously adjusting dosage based on raw water quality to ensure stable and 
compliant treated water quality. Therefore, the relationship between 
dosage and treated water quality exhibits a direct causal link, despite 
dosage exceeding a certain threshold may have minimal impact on 
treated water quality. On the other hand, the relationship between 
dosage and raw water quality reflects practical expertise, with water 
plant operators relying on their experience and raw water quality to set 
chemical dosages that meet treated water standards. Because of the wide 
variation in raw water quality and the stability of treated water quality, 
raw water indicators are generally more important than treated water 
indicators in the model.
Fig. 6 (b) displays the contribution of input features to the prediction 
results, with features arranged in descending order along the vertical 
axis. Consistent SHAP values aligned with characteristic values for EC- 
RW, NH3-N-RW, CODMn-RW, and NTU-RW suggest a positive influ­
ence on coagulant dosing, while the opposite trend for pH-RW, T-RW, 
and WTR suggests a negative influence on dosing. For example, higher 
EC-RW corresponds to higher SHAP values, indicating an increase in 
dosing. Higher EC implies lower water purity, potentially containing 
higher concentrations of dissolved salts, organics, metal ions, and other 
contaminants. The cations in PACl can neutralize the surface charges of 
negatively charged suspended particles or colloidal substances in water, 
reducing the electrostatic repulsion between particles and promoting 
aggregation [50]. In contrast, higher WTR values correspond to lower 
SHAP values, indicating a decrease in dosage.
Fig. 7 illustrates the SHAP values for individual variables, which 
demonstrates the marginal effects of each feature on model predictions. 
For the raw water indicator, conductivity reflects the total concentration 
of dissolved ions in the water and shows a nearly linear enhancement 
relationship with dosage when it is between 300 and 550 μS/cm, while 
below 300 μS/cm or above 550 μS/cm this relationship shows a trend of 
diminishing returns. High conductivity compresses the bilayer and 
promotes coagulation, but low pH inhibits Al(OH)3 formation when 
incremental compensation is required. Ammonia is nitrogen in the form 
of free ammonia (NH3) and ammonium ions (NH4
+) regulated by pH and 
temperature. NH3-N-RW in the range of 0–0.2 mg/L also exerts a posi­
tive influence on coagulant dosage, with the relationship becoming less 
significant beyond this range. High temperature accelerates the hydro­
lysis, but low NH3-N can reduce the interference, at this time the PACl 
dosage can be dosed according to professional judgment.
CODMn reflects the total amount of organic matter and reducing 
inorganic matter in the water body, there is no obvious correlation with 
the dosage, if it is less than 4 mg/L, and more than 4 mg/L threshold, it 
will compete for the active site with the PACl, and the SHAP value at this 
time shows a sharp upward trend. Furthermore, NTU-RW generally has a 
positive promoting effect on dosing, as an appropriate increase in 
coagulant to promote particle aggregation and settlement, which is in 
line with the findings of Vunain et al. [51]. However, when NTU-RW is 
less than 2 NTU, the SHAP value shows an upward trend, as sparse and 
dispersed colloidal particles in low-turbidity water limit the ability of 
colloids formed after PACl hydrolysis to capture solid impurity particles. 
Therefore, the dosage of PACl must be increased to compensate for 
diffusion limitations and to ensure electroneutralization [52–54]. In 
high CODMn and high turbidity water, organic matter can encapsulate 
colloidal particles and additional amounts of PACl are needed to 
enhance charge neutralization and break down the organic matter 
barrier.
In addition, the required coagulant dosage decreases as the pH-RW 
increases within the range of 8.0 to 8.4, which is attributed to the 
opposite charges of PACl and contaminant particles in a weakly alkaline 
environment [55], allowing PACl to exhibit superior coagulation prop­
erties [56]. It is likely that temperature typically has a negative effect on 
dosing. The hydrolysis of PACl is an endothermic reaction, but the 
increased viscosity at low temperatures impedes the thermal motion of 
suspended particles in water, which is detrimental to the stability of 
colloidal aggregation [57]. Therefore, the dosage of PACl should be 
increased to achieve optimal coagulation efficacy [58].
For treated water indicators, a distinct negative linear correlation is 
observed between pH-TW and the quantity of coagulant administered, 
primarily clustering within a narrow pH range of 7.6 to 7.8. This 
negative linear relationship is primarily due to the fact that the 
Fig. 6. SHAP feature importance (a) and summary plot (b) for the test set. The vertical axis of plot (a) represents the features in descending order of their average 
absolute SHAP value on the model output, with larger values indicating a higher contribution of the feature to the prediction, and the horizontal axis indicates the 
size of the SHAP value, reflecting the average degree of influence of the feature on the model output. Fig (b) each point represents the SHAP value of a sample, the 
position of the horizontal axis shows the size of the value, the colour shades reflect the original value of the feature is high or low (red is high value, blue is low 
value), the vertical axis represents the order by the importance of the feature, in line with Fig (a), the superimposed trend represents the relationship between the 
feature’s value high or low and the direction of the SHAP value that can be observed from the distribution of points. (For interpretation of the references to colour in 
this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
L. Feng et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Journal of Water Process Engineering 75 (2025) 107925 
7 


<!-- Page 8 -->
hydrolysis reaction of PACl releases H+, resulting in a decrease in 
effluent pH [59]. However, over-dosing chemicals to meet the effluent 
pH standard will cause the colloids to re-stabilize, resulting in a decrease 
in flocculation efficiency. In addition, the increase in dissolved 
aluminum residue can affect the safety of the effluent [54]. In addition, 
no apparent linear relationship is observed between PACl dosage and 
NTU-TW after coagulation, contrary to the results reported by Chiavola 
[60]. NTU-TW is affected by both raw water quality and coagulant 
dosage. Specifically, elevated NTU-RW values require a manual increase 
in coagulant dosage to meet NTU-TW standards. Therefore, the NTU-TW 
values from an operating plant remain relatively low and stable with 
minimal variation, which has little impact on dosage prediction. In 
addition, the effectiveness of PACl in the coagulation process depends 
primarily on charge neutralization and adsorption bridging. An appro­
priate dosage of PACl hydrolyzes to produce positively charged ions that 
neutralize negatively charged colloids, thereby enhancing turbidity 
removal. However, excessive PACl triggers “colloidal protection,” where 
excess positively charged ions adsorb onto colloidal surfaces and 
hydrophobic colloids become hydrophilic, reducing floc settling and 
ultimately decreasing turbidity removal efficiency [56,61,62].
Although AutoML (TPOT) and SHAP perform well in optimizing 
machine learning models and improving interpretability, they still have 
several limitations. AutoML may face the risk of overfitting during 
model selection and hyperparameter optimization, and in this study, 
despite the training set R2 = 1.00, the high consistency of the repeated 
cross-validation and the independent test set (R2 = 0.96) suggests that 
the model was not overfitted. The SHAP method reveals complex action 
laws that cannot be captured by traditional linear methods, identifies 
the threshold response behavior of key parameters, and breaks through 
the limitations of linear statistics.
Fig. 8 shows waterfall plots and decision plots for two specific local 
samples using the SHAP method. Fig. 8a and b show a sample with a 
coagulant dosage higher than the average value (14.5 mg/L). This 
sample was collected in February, with the raw water coming from the 
Luanhe River, and T-RW recorded at 3.8 ◦C. Fig. 8a shows that the 
predicted coagulant dosage for this sample (34.9 mg/L) is higher than 
Fig. 7. Nonlinear relationships between individual water quality parameters and coagulant dosage for EC-RW (a), pH-TW (b), NH3-N-RW (c), CODMn-RW (d), T-RW 
(e), NTU-RW (f), WTR (g), NTU-TW (h), and pH-RW (i). For each data point with a positive SHAP value, the dosage of coagulant increases with the SHAP value, 
exerting a positive impact. Conversely, for points with negative SHAP values, the opposite effect is observed. The units for these variables are consistent with those 
in Fig. 2.
L. Feng et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Journal of Water Process Engineering 75 (2025) 107925 
8 


<!-- Page 9 -->
the average expected value in the test set (14.5 mg/L), mainly due to 
CODMn-RW, followed by EC-RW, NTU-RW, and NH3-N-RW, while the 
contribution of pH-RW and WTR are negligible. Fig. 8b shows the 
contribution of each feature in exceeding the average prediction (14.5 
mg/L), ultimately resulting in a final output of 34.9 mg/L for this 
sample. First, CODMn-RW reaches 5.46 mg/L, exceeding the threshold of 
4 mg/L, the SHAP value increases significantly. In addition, with EC-RW 
at 600.6 μS/cm, NH3-N-RW at 0.36 mg/L and NTU-RW at 7.19 NTU, 
their SHAP values all remain above 0. Based on professional judgment of 
the overall impact of raw water quality, the dosage of PACl was subse­
quently increased from the average level.
Fig. 8c and d show a sample taken in May with the Yangtze River as 
the source water, showing a coagulant dosage below the average. Fig. 8c 
shows that the predicted coagulant dosage for this sample (8.57 mg/L) is 
significantly lower than the average expected value in the test set (14.5 
mg/L). Among the factors, pH-TW (with a value of 7.906) has the most 
significant negative effect on the dosage prediction, indicating that a 
coagulant dosage at this level will significantly lower the pH of the of 
treated water. This is followed by T-RW, EC-RW, and CODMn-RW, while 
the contribution of NH3-N-RW and WTR is negligible. Fig. 8d further 
illustrates how each feature contributes to shifting the dosage towards a 
value below the average prediction (14.5 mg/L), ultimately resulting in 
a final output of 8.57 mg/L for this sample. For the raw water charac­
terized by T at 22.34 ◦C, EC at 290.2 μS/cm, CODMn-RW at 2.6 mg/L, 
and pH at 8.15, the corresponding SHAP values for these parameters are 
uniformly negative. Based on practical experience, it was decided to 
reduce the dosage of PACl to a level below the average.
In summary, the model developed in this study optimizes coagulant 
dosing, not only enabling precise chemical addition in the coagulation 
process of water treatment plants—thereby significantly minimizing 
coagulant overuse—but also employing interpretable methods to reveal 
key factors and their impact relationships influencing coagulant con­
sumption. This empowers plant operators to make more scientific and 
rational decisions, avoiding overdosing while ensuring effluent quality. 
However, in practical water treatment applications, further efforts are 
required to mitigate the environmental impacts of coagulant use. This 
can be achieved by integrating the model with processes such as pre- 
chlorination and activated carbon adsorption to reduce coagulant de­
mand. Additionally, developing green and sustainable water treatment 
technologies, such as bio-based flocculants (e.g., chitosan, microbial 
flocculants), photocatalytic technologies[63,64], could reduce reliance 
on non-renewable resources and minimize environmental risks posed by 
chemical residues and byproducts (e.g., aluminum hydroxide sludge).