4. Conclusions
In this study, we developed a predictive model for coagulant dosing 
in a water treatment plant using AutoML and interpreted the model 
results to address the transparency issue associated with such predictive 
models. The conclusions are as follows: 
(1) The RF model developed using AutoML demonstrated superior 
performance with a test R2 value of 0.96, RMSE of 0.89, and MAE 
of 0.47. This model offers a faster development cycle and higher 
prediction accuracy compared to manually selected models, and 
Fig. 8. Decision plots and waterfall plots for two local samples, featuring three key characteristics: 1) the output value, representing the prediction for an individual 
sample; 2) the base value, corresponding to the average expected value in the testing set; and 3) colour coding, where red variables push the prediction upwards and 
blue variables push it downwards) are presented. The Fig includes decision plot (a) and waterfall plot (b) for a sample with dosing amount above the average, and 
decision plot (c) and waterfall plot (d) for a sample with dosing amount below the average. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the 
reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
L. Feng et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Journal of Water Process Engineering 75 (2025) 107925 
9 


<!-- Page 10 -->
serves as a valuable tool for predicting coagulant dosing in water 
treatment plants.
(2) Model interpretation based on SHAP values revealed the influ­
ence of each water quality indicator on the prediction results. 
Specifically, when NTU-RW is low and relatively stable, raw 
water conductivity emerges as the most significant factor influ­
encing coagulant dosing, followed by NH3-N-RW, CODMn-RW, T- 
RW, and WTR.
(3) The optimized model predicts daily PACl savings of 222 kg (11 %) 
for water from the Yangtze River and 225 kg (8 %) for water from 
the Luanhe River. This highlights the key role of the coagulant 
dosing model in improving water treatment efficiency and opti­
mizing resource utilization.