Evaluate the quality of the treated water following standard pro­
cedures for measuring various nitrogen compounds and organic content. 
Monitor key parameters such as DO and pH using a portable meter 
designed for field use (HI98191, Hanna®, Italy). Adjustments to HRT 
were made by controlling the peristaltic pumping device’s flow rate. 
Systematically organized and analyzed the collected monitoring data 
resulted in 15 key feature parameters, including salinity, oxygen levels, 
retention time, acidity, temperature, and input and output concentra­
tions of key contaminants. Specifically, the output two parameters were 
the effluent of ammonia nitrogen (NH4
+-Nout) and total nitrogen (TNout), 
while the remaining 13 parameters served as input variables: salinity, 
DO, HRT, pH, temperature (Temp), chemical oxygen demand in the 
influent (CODin), chemical oxygen demand in the effluent (CODout), 
ammonia nitrogen in the influent (NH4
+-Nin), nitrite nitrogen in the 
effluent (NO2
−-Nout), nitrate nitrogen in the effluent (NO3
−-Nout), carbon- 
to-nitrogen (C/N) ratio, chemical oxygen demand removal efficiency 
(CODeff) and total nitrogen removal efficiency (TNeff) in the effluent of 
MBR.
The pre-processing steps include removing duplicate samples and 
refining the data set to ensure the accuracy of the model and prevent 
data leakage. Input features were optimized using standardization 
techniques provided by the Scikit-learn library. The Z-score method 
detects outliers and removes extreme values above the threshold of 3. 
Additionally, winsorization was applied to cap values outside the 1st 
and 99th percentiles, preserving the data’s overall distribution. The 
dataset was then randomly split, with 80 % allocated for training and 20 
% reserved for testing. The final processed dataset consisted of 570 
samples (see supplementary materials). Fig. 2a shows a box plot of all 
the data, giving the mean and standard deviation. All machine learning 
models were validated using this testing set, allowing for a compre­
hensive accuracy evaluation. 10-fold cross-validation was applied in the 
Q. Wei et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Bioresource Technology 426 (2025) 132393 
2 


<!-- Page 3 -->
training phase to ensure the robustness of the model evaluation. This 
method divides the data into 10 subsets, iterating through 10 rounds. 
Train with nine subsets, validate with the remaining subsets, and train 
and test with each data point. This approach helps minimize overfitting 
and provides a more reliable estimate of model performance. Correla­
tion coefficients ranged from −0.05 to 0.22 for NH4
+-Nout and from 
−0.52 to 0.26 for TNout (Fig. 2b). Pearson correlational analysis revealed 
weak associations between nitrogen-related outputs and other variables, 
indicating their lower influence on the overall model performance.
2.3. Model construction and optimization
