Automated Feature Engineering (AutoFE) (Hutter et al., 2019) is an important component
of AutoML (Ravishankar and Battineni, 2025). A primary objective of AutoFE is generating
new features to enhance the representational power of the original feature set. It improves
AutoML efficiency and robustness, and has been widely applied in domains such as finance
and medicine (Hollmann et al., 2023; Lucas et al., 2020; Waring et al., 2020).
Traditionally, AutoFE methods primarily adopt an expansion-reduction framework that
explores large combinatorial spaces of predefined feature transformations (Zhang et al., 2023;
Hollmann et al., 2023). These approaches have demonstrated strong performance under
sufficient search budgets. However, the manually defined search space is not only complex to
design but also limits the exploration, potentially leading to sub-optimal results (Abhyankar
et al., 2025). In addition, it is hard to interpret the enormous number of generated features.
Since Large Language Models (LLMs) (Chang et al., 2024) have shown strong reasoning
(Wei et al., 2022) and In-Context Learning (ICL) (Dong et al., 2024) capabilities, extensive
research has explored leveraging LLMs to enhance AutoFE through sequential optimization.
© X. Zheng, K. Uchida & S. Shirakawa.
arXiv:2608.17948v1  [cs.LG]  18 Aug 2026


<!-- Page 2 -->
Zheng Uchida Shirakawa
Figure 1: The overview of SIGMA.
By providing semantic (features and task) descriptions and statistical information (Fathol-
lahzadeh et al., 2025), LLMs can generate interpretable features from domain knowledge (Li
et al., 2026; Han et al., 2024). Such LLM-based AutoFE methods show promise for Data
Science (DS) Agent (Guo et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025). However, the assumption of access
to semantic information limits their applicability in real-world scenarios (Nam et al., 2024).
For example, in privacy-preserving medical datasets, or sensor logs, the semantic information
may be unavailable or unreliable. In addition, the continuous expansion of the optimization
trajectory used for ICL not only increases the risk of exceeding context length constraints,
but also induces a bias toward successful feature-operation pairs. However, without the
trajectory information, LLMs tend to generate duplicates.
To address the above challenges, we propose a SHAP-enhanced Implicit-trajectory
Generation for Metadata-free AutoFE (SIGMA), a scalable constant-context optimization
framework for metadata-free LLM-based AutoFE. Figure 1 illustrates the overview of SIGMA.
First, SIGMA leverages SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) values (Ponce-Bobadilla
et al., 2024) to provide task-aware signals for group feature generation. It enables effective
optimization without relying on semantic descriptions. Specifically, input features will be
divided into three groups (top, useful, and weak) according to SHAP values and used for
generating intra-group and cross-group features. Motivated by the fact that LLMs exhibit a
strong contextual bias toward provided information, and that minor prompt perturbations can


<!-- Page 3 -->
SHAP-Guided Implicit-Trajectory Generation for Metadata-Free LLM-Based AutoFE
significantly enhance generation diversity, we propose EXposed-feature Implicit Trajectory
(EXIT) to mitigate the overhead associated with expanding the optimization trajectory. In
this manner, the visible feature set serves as a proxy for the optimization history, where the
trajectory is implicitly reflected in the feature composition rather than being enumerated
via explicit tokens. The contributions of our work are as follows:
1. We propose SIGMA, a metadata-free LLM-based AutoFE framework that replaces
semantic descriptions with SHAP-based importance signals and introduces a grouped
generation strategy for structured feature exploration.
2. We introduce EXIT to enable effective long-horizon optimization without explicit
trajectory in the prompt, which reduces the duplicate generation rate from 37.2% to 6.8%.
3. Results show that SIGMA achieves comparable performance to current LLM-based
baselines, and remains competitive with traditional AutoFE with efficient feature utilization.
2. Related Work
