Traditional AutoFE Methods. Traditional AutoFE methods are usually based on an
expansion-reduction framework. Deep Feature Synthesis (DFS) (Kanter and Veeramachaneni,
2015) leveraged relational paths and mathematical primitives to automatically generate
cross-table features, and then select the most performing ones. ExploreKit (Katz et al., 2016)
proposed a framework to generate candidate features by combining all original features,
do selection on a ranking classifier. Since non-linear transformation is also very beneficial,
AutoFeat (Horn et al., 2019) introduced non-linear feature transformations and employs an
L1-regularized linear model for feature selection, effectively enhancing the predictive power
of linear models while preserving interpretability. Besides, evolutionary computation (B¨ack
and Schwefel, 1996) and genetic programming (Espejo et al., 2009) have also been widely
applied in traditional AutoFE. TPOT (Olson and Moore, 2016) utilized genetic programming
to combine feature selectors, transformers, and classifiers to maximize predictive accuracy.
Other representative methods include AutoGluon (Erickson et al., 2020), which treats feature
interactions implicitly within its hierarchical intelligent type inference and multi-stage model
stacking architecture, and OpenFE (Zhang et al., 2023), which proposes a two-stage pruning
strategy to efficiently identify high-quality candidate features.
LLM-based AutoFE Methods. LLMs built on the Transformer architecture (Vaswani
et al., 2017) have shown powerful ICL and reasoning capabilities (Guo et al., 2025), aligned
with domain knowledge. CAAFE (Hollmann et al., 2023) first proposed to take advantage
of the prior semantic knowledge of LLMs to generate interpretable features based on textual
descriptions. FeatLLM (Han et al., 2024) utilized LLMs to generate rules to transfer features
to binary sequences based on feature descriptions and samples, boosting few-shot tabular
learning. In addition, such a framework can be easily combined with optimization algorithms.
For example, LLM-FE (Abhyankar et al., 2025) combines LLM-based feature engineering
with evolutionary computation. However, in the real-world, feature and task descriptions
may be hard to obtain because of privacy and security issues, while the expansion of features
will dramatically increase the prompt length. Therefore, OCTree (Nam et al., 2024) proposed
using only the tree expression of features to generate new ones. Although such research has
achieved great success, there are several concerns about LLMs’ memory of datasets (Zhang
et al., 2024), as well as the preference for generating simple operations (K¨uken et al., 2024).


<!-- Page 4 -->
Zheng Uchida Shirakawa
As a solution, Li et al. (2026) proposed decoupling the transformation operation proposal
from the selection processes.
3. Methodology
