The correlation matrix (Fig. 7) was instrumental in evalu­
ating the linear dependencies among the six selected input 
parameters and the target output, COD Removal Percent­
age, serving as a critical step before non-linear machine 
learning modelling for the SAnMBR system.
Influent COD and OLR showed a very strong positive 
correlation (r = 1.00), which is expected because OLR is 
partly derived from influent COD. Although such a rela­
tionship may cause multicollinearity in linear models, both 
variables were retained in the SVR model to preserve the 
operational description of the SAnMBR system. Regard­
ing the target output, influent COD and OLR showed the 
strongest positive linear associations with COD removal (r 
= 0.74), while pH showed a weaker but still positive cor­
relation (r = 0.36). Conversely, influent TSS showed an 
almost negligible correlation with COD removal (r = 0.07), 
whereas turbidity exhibited a weak negative association (r = 
−0.26). This suggests that suspended solids alone were not 
a primary linear driver of COD removal, while increased 
turbidity may be linked to conditions that reduce treatment 
Fig. 10  Distribution of Percentage Error (%) versus Actual COD removal (%) for the SVR (left), MLR (center), and ANN (right) models. Training 
and testing data are represented by blue and red points, respectively
 
Fig. 9  Comparison of actual (experimental) and predicted COD removal (%) by the SVR, MLR, and ANN models. The R2 values for the training 
phase (blue data) and testing phase (red data) are shown
 


<!-- Page 12 -->
1 3
12618
M. Mousazadehgavan et al.
performance. Influent 2,4-DCP showed a weak positive cor­
relation with COD removal (r = 0.26), indicating that its 
direct linear association with treatment performance was 
limited. Therefore, correlation analysis alone may not ade­
quately describe the role of 2,4-DCP, particularly if its effect 
depends on concentration thresholds or interactions with 
other operational variables, as further examined through 
PDP analysis. Influent COD and OLR showed the strongest 
positive correlations with COD removal (r = 0.74 for both), 
followed by influent pH with a moderate positive correlation 
(r = 0.36). These results suggest that organic loading vari­
ables had the closest linear association with COD removal, 
while pH showed a weaker but still noticeable relationship.
3.3  Model results for COD Removal Prediction
